# Transcript: Joshua   Ch5   Out Of The Wilderness_1
Date: 2026-07-13

---

Well, good morning. Welcome to Catalyst. I'm Dr. Bill. I am privileged to be the pastor and primary teacher here at Catalyst Community Church. For all of you who are joining us online as a part of our online campus, thank you for being a part of the extended Catalyst family. As you saw in the video intro, we are going to be continuing our teaching series in the book of Joshua. So a couple of easy ways to be a part of the service today. If you're joining us online, hopefully you're also in our live chat so that you can be interfacing with the people there. I made a post in that chat earlier that has a link to the question form. So if you are here in the Wilmington campus, the easiest way to get to that question form is to open the Catalyst app. Those of you who are in the app a lot, you'll notice I changed the way changes around some of the buttons a little bit to make things a little easier to find. But if you scroll down, you'll see a blue box with a white note card that says sermon notes. Click on that. That has my sermon notes for today as well as a place for you to add your own notes. And that's where the question button is. So you are free to ask questions during the sermon today. Those questions will go directly to my wife. And then as I get to the end of my sermon, she will feed them up to me and we will just we will just go wherever they go. My favorite part about the Q&A at the end of the service is I have no idea what you're going to say. And so my ADHD and just you my ADHD says to sit here and go, what are they going to say today? So if you are interested in asking questions, please feel free to do so. This is a question safe environment. We are continuing studying in the book of Joshua. Joshua now leads the children of Israel. And as we've watched over the last couple of chapters, they made it to the river's edge. The children of Israel have miraculously caused the Jordan River to stand up on edge 25 miles away, stacked up to a 12 foot high apartment building. And the nation of Israel crossed again on dry ground. They connected the Red Sea crossing to the entrance into the promised land because that entire 40 year timeout was not supposed to be there. It was because of disobedience. This morning, we are jumping into Joshua chapter five. The children of Israel have made it to the water. God put his presence in the midst of the water. The water parted. The majority of the nation crosses over. Remember, there are three tribes that live on the other side. They were allowed to stay there, but a third of their fighting soldiers came across to help take the promised land. Today, we're going to start our reading in chapter five. The children of Israel have crossed the Jordan River on dry ground. Last Sunday, we saw them build a pillar of stones to remember the crossing. And here is the first act that the children of Israel do in the promised land that they were supposed to go to at the end of the Exodus story. Does everybody track in where we're at? All right. So if you have your Bibles, turn or tap with me to Joshua chapter five. If you have the catalyst app, there is a Bible in the very bottom of that footer bar. So just click Bible and then you can tap straight to Joshua five. I'm going to read it. It's only 15 verses today. I'm going to read it and then we will go through and chop it up verse by verse. So this is Joshua chapter five, starting in verse one. Now, when all the Amorite kings west of the Jordan and all the Canaanite kings along the coast heard how the Lord had dried up the Jordan before the Israelites until they had crossed over. Their hearts melted in fear and they no longer had the courage to face the Israelites. At that time, the Lord said to Joshua, make flint knives and circumcise the Israelites again. So Joshua made flint knives and circumcise the Israelites at Gebe Haraloth. Now, this is what he did. So all excuse me, all those who came out of Egypt, all the men of military age died in the wilderness on the way after leaving Egypt. All the people that came out had been circumcised, but all the people born in the wilderness during the journey from Egypt had not. Verse six, the Israelites had moved about in the wilderness 40 years until all the men who were of military age when they left Egypt had died since they had not obeyed the Lord. For the Lord had sworn to them that they would not see the land he had solemnly promised their ancestors to give us a land flowing with milk and honey. So he raised up their sons in their place, and these were the ones Joshua circumcised. They were still uncircumcised because they had not been circumcised on the way. And after the whole nation had been circumcised, they remained where they were in camp until they were healed. Then the Lord said to Joshua, today I have rolled away the reproach of Egypt from you. So the place has been called Gilgal to this day. Verse 10, on the evening of the 14th day of the month, while camped at Gilgal on the plains of Jericho, the Israelites celebrated the Passover. The day after the Passover, that very day, they ate some of the produce of the land unleavened bread and roasted grain. The manna stopped the day after they ate this food from the land. There was no longer any manna for the Israelites. But that year they ate the produce of Canaan. Now, when Joshua was near Jericho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him with a drawn sword in his hand. Joshua went up to him and asked, are you for us or our enemies? Neither, he replied. But as commander of the army of the Lord, I have now come. Then Joshua fell face down to the ground in reverence and asked him, what message does my Lord have for his servant? The commander of the Lord's army replied, take off your sandals for the place where you are standing is holy. And Joshua did so. All right. So let's rewind back to the beginning here. There are a couple really, really cool things that are happening. So those who were following along in the notes in the app, this is point a God prepares the inheritance. I'm sorry. Let me rewind. I forgot to mention what the title of today's sermon is. It's like I do this every day. The key thought that holds all of the messages in this entire series together. Here it is. The promised land can only be inherited through submission to the promise maker message focus. God prepares the way provides for the journey, but inheritance is only received through holiness, obedience, remembrance and submission. So in this is letter A, the first thing we see in this chapter is God prepares the inheritance. Please remember when you read the book of Joshua, you are not reading a book about a military who is conquering a land. You are reading a book about a covenant people who are receiving a land that reception involves military practice. But if we were to claim that the Israelites merely took the land of Canaan instead of received the land of Canaan, you would be misreading the text. God told Abraham back in Genesis 12, I will give this land as a forever inheritance. God even told Abraham that his descendants would be enslaved for 400 years. But, John, I'm not going to forget. I will come back for my people. All of that is to establish that this land is given by God. That doesn't mean they still don't receive it. But in our language, receiving something and taking something are two very different things. One takes something by force. One receives something from someone else in a position of authority. So when we read this is verse one. Now, all the Amorite kings west of the Jordan, the Canaanite kings along the coast heard how the Lord you notice they're all capital letters there. What does it mean in the Bible when you read the word Lord in all capital letters? That means Yahweh, the covenant name for God. There are multiple words for God in the Bible. Our English translators have chosen this as the standard way in an English Bible to let us know we are talking about the special covenant name for God, not just, you know, little G God. This is like big G God in our language. The covenant God of Israel, Yahweh, that's all packed into that word Lord, dried up the Jordan before the Israelites until they crossed over. Their hearts melted in fear and they no longer had the courage to face the Israelites. What was it that God said to his people? I will drive them out ahead of you. Here in verse one, there are there's like almost a reckoning or harkening back to rehabs comments in chapter two when she says we've heard all that your God did and our courage has left us. Now you see it again repeated here in chapter five, verse one, and it says their hearts melted in fear. That might actually be the same exact words from chapter two. Their hearts melted in fear. Who are they fearful of? Right? When you're afraid of something, your fear has an object. What is the object of fear for the Amorite kings and the Canaanite kings? It's not Israel. It's Israel's God. This God who part because in in chapter two, rehab says we have heard what God did to Egypt at the Red Sea. We've heard that story. That was 40 years ago. But we heard what your God did. And now imagine what it feels like. Barry, you and I are just chilling in Canaan, right? And we think back to the story that our parents told us about this people who came out of Egypt and the sea parted for them. And then we're sitting on the back 40 and we look out and there's a 12 foot story tall of water. And the Jordan River, which in this area of the world would be life itself, right? They needed water in order to grow crops, water in order to irrigate and life itself stops for this people. So they don't have to get wet walking across the riverbed. Barry, I don't know about you, but I would be a little afraid. Keep in mind also at this time, people people think that their their their gods live in areas. So this is called Heno theism. For those of you like your vocab words, Heno H E N O theism is the belief that a god is regional. Like there is a god of Delaware. There's a god of Virginia. There's a god of Georgia. There's a god of fill in the blank with your favorite state. That would be what Heno theism means. So when Israel shows up and they're coming from Egypt coming to Canaan and their god is still active and authoritative, that really challenges their worldview. Scott, whatever this god is like Bros on that region, how does he have authority in Egypt and has authority to stop this river over here? Who is this god? And why are my Canaanite gods who they live here? Like how come I can't and I gods are not enough to protect us from whatever this god is they're rolling up with. They're not afraid of Israel. They're afraid of God. They're afraid of what God is doing. And that's why you have to see the two miracles is so important. Yes, God is bringing a nation out of slavery and into his promised land, but he is doing it with his hand, not their weapons. And if you misread that, then you could mistake and you know, those of you who like your apologetics, you know we get attacked for the book of Joshua all the time. Oh, that's such a genocidal book. No, it's not. It's that God owns everything and he's the one who has the right to say I'm going to give this land to Jim and Lisa and it belongs to them and their children and their children's children. And you can't take it away because I'm giving it to them. This is God doing his job of preparing the inheritance for his people. Everybody see that. Also, I need to point out that in our natural like military combat oriented thinking, Steve, you would think that in this big moment where we cross the Jordan River and all of our enemies are like twitching in fear. This is the moment to strike like gear up, grab your bottle of water, get your weapon. Let's go hit them while they're afraid. And that is not what happens in this chapter. So we have to put aside our earthly based or our human based conflict thinking because the fear of God that comes out of verse one is not used in this chapter for them to go conquer because it's God giving not them taking now. Here's a letter B is covenant renewal requires holiness covenant renewal requires holiness. Let's look at verse two at the time at that time, meaning exactly when they crossed and everybody be afraid and they're tweaking out at that time. The Lord said to tweak it out. That's an official theological term. Just go with me. The Lord said to Joshua, make Flint knives and circumcise the Israelites again. This sounds so backwards to our thinking. Right. We are Steve. We are going to cross into enemy territory and do some snippy snippy. We're not going to war. We're not gearing up. We're not what that's why I say you have to put aside your human thinking to see what God is doing in this chapter. So they cross over all of the enemy is under the fear of God. And the next thing that God says is, by the way, I need you to go circumcise all of the Israelites again. Verse three, Joshua made flint knives and circumcise the Israelites period. Full stop. There's no delayed disobedience in Joshua from from verse two to verse three. But you have to ask the question, why did God make this the priority? Because that's God choosing. It's not us choosing. It's God saying, OK, I brought you this far. Sharita, you just experienced this miraculous river crossing. Now, what's the very next thing you're going to do? Everybody gets to be circumcised. Yay. Right. Why? Well, I think the kind of obvious answer is. Circumcision plays a very specific role in the Old Testament covenant. And if you don't understand this, you're maybe going to miss it. Circumcision is the sign of the covenant. It does not make the covenant. So let's go back and talk about Old Testament Israel for a second. Go back to Genesis 12. God chooses Abram, changes his name to Abraham, makes the covenant. Fast forward 1314 Genesis 15. There's this super weird scene. Anybody's read Genesis. There's this weird scene where God tells Abraham to take all these animals and cut them in half. And then they're going to walk in between the halves of these carcass animals. And then God causes Abraham to fall asleep. And then there's this weird like flaming fire pot. If you've never heard this story before, I promise I'm not making it up. It's straight up in the Bible. And God walks between the halves of these animals. So here's what you need to understand. If you and I, Jim, you and I are going to make a covenant, right? In order, if we're living in Old Testament Abraham times, the way we make a covenant is we go and we get an animal. Let's just take a goat and we're going to cut that goat straight in half and we're going to put the goat on either side. And then you're going to I'm going to walk from me to you and you're going to walk from you to me. And then we're going to cross again. What are we doing by walking in between of the halves of this slain animal? What Jim and I are saying is we're making a promise. You back out on me. You end up like that. That's what that means. God is making an everlasting covenant with Israel. But here's what happened. Abraham never walked between the animal. Only God did. God caused Abraham to fall asleep. What does that mean? That means the Abrahamic covenant is guaranteed by God's character alone. Abraham's disobedience doesn't disqualify God's inheritance for all of his descendants. So when you understand that and what was the one thing Abraham was responsible for circumcision? Now, a lot of people are me just you're going to ask, right? So let's just handle the tough question. Now you're going to ask, why does God choose that of all of the things God can ask us to do? Why does God choose circumcision as the symbol for his covenant? My official theological answer is I don't know. But I'm going to tell you what I actually believe. This is my opinion. This is not scripture. So the next sentence I'm about to say is literally just Dr. Bill's opinion. But when I think about what the Abrahamic covenant is, an everlasting covenant that's inherited generationally, God chose the symbol. He said, you need to trust me with that which makes your generations. You need to let me cut the very thing that guarantees your children and your inheritance. And to me, that's what makes the symbol of circumcision so powerful is God said your children and your children's children and your children's children. And to prove it to you, you're going to trust me with your children instead of your own virility, instead of your own biology. That's why I believe God shows circumcision as his sign of covenant for Old Testament Israel because it's inherited generationally. Why do you need to know all of that backstory? Because if I didn't tell you that Joshua chapter five, verse two, look whack. Why does God cross everybody into enemy territory and then have everybody get a snip? And then we got to heal. We're down for at least a couple of days. Now, ladies, trust me. Y'all women can fight. I mean, we got jail putting tent pegs through people's heads in the Old Testament. It's not that the women couldn't fight, but the entire male force that was born during the wilderness wandering wasn't circumcised. And I'll get to why that is later. But I need you to see that before God allowed his children to receive the inheritance of the covenant, he required them to carry the sign of the covenant. You can't have the blessing of God and be outside covenant relationship with God. He said, listen, I carried you this far. Everything's been on my back, but you have a responsibility to you have to carry the sign of my covenant if you want to receive the inheritance of my covenant. Does that make sense? And God prioritized it in enemy territory. You're just you're going to have Casey. You should have to trust. You're going to have to trust me that this is the sign you have to carry in your flesh. And you're going to have to trust me to keep you safe while all of the men in your community are healing for a couple of days at least. Then we get to letter C obedience must be recovered from the wilderness. Here's the why behind the circumcision problem. Look at verse four. Now, this is why he did so. Praise God. He gives us an explanation. All those who came out of Egypt, all the men of military age died in the wilderness on the way after leaving Egypt. Why? Because they didn't trust God. If you go back and read the Exodus story, they left, they made it to the edge. Moses sends in twelve spies. The twelve spies look at the land and they go, man, it's so good. It's good looking. But but there's giants who live there. And I'm like, I mean, are we really talking giants? Because every Jewish person I've ever met is like five foot two. So maybe it was just NBA level players. But either way, they don't trust God to give them their inheritance. And now we get to this. All those who came out of Egypt, men of military age died on the way after leaving the others. All the people who came out, meaning out of Exodus, came out, had been circumcised, but all the people born in the wilderness during the journey from Egypt had not. Verse five is the most damning part of this entire chapter. Because the entire adult generation who left Egypt had faithful parents. They circumcised their children in Egypt. The generation who refused to trust God and wandered into wilderness didn't circumcise their kids. Why? Because they didn't trust God. The not trusting God with the twelve spies continued through the entire forty year wilderness wandering. Parents who did not see it valuable or important to pass on the faith to their children or have their children to bear the sign of the covenant. Verse six. The Israelites moved about in the wilderness forty years until all the men were of military age when they left Egypt had died since they had not obeyed the Lord. Interesting. They also didn't obey the Lord while they were wandering in the wilderness being fed with manna every day. You are receiving supernatural provision from God six days a week and still can't figure out how to live in covenant obedient. Bro. What do I do with that? How? Like that just doesn't cut my ADHD brain does not get that you got so used to supernatural glorious supernatural provision that you took it for granted and still couldn't live in obedience. That's amazing. Also makes me feel really good. I don't live in supernatural provision today and I still struggle with obedience. So end of verse six for the Lord had sworn to them they would not see the land they had solemnly promised to their ancestors to give us a land flowing with milk and honey verse seven. So he raised up their sons in their place. Let me go ahead and answer the other difficult question now so that we don't have to wait later. Is God's word still true that Israel inherits the promised land? Yes, is God's word also true that because of Israel's disobedience post Exodus there is a generation that did not receive the promised land. Yes, this is a beautiful example of God's sovereignty and man's moral responsibility working hand in hand. God said no, this will be a forever lasting inheritance all the way back to Abraham. Your descendants will inherit this land. That's super true. But the people who experienced the 10 plagues didn't their disobedience cost them an entire generation of waiting. And he said in verse seven, so he raised up their sons in their place. That to me says everything. God's word is still true. But an entire generation missed out on receiving the covenant inheritance because of disobedience. God's word is still true. He still holds his children morally responsible. The idea that one has to overtake the other to me is the big false game. Both are true. God did promise the nation and inheritance, and he did discipline that nation when they were disobedient. So he raised up their sons in their place. And these were the ones Joshua circumcised. Interesting. The children who were raised by faithless disobedient parents during the wilderness wandering who don't have the sign of the covenant, they get the inheritance because mommy and daddy couldn't hack it. I am so thankful that I was raised by godly parents. I can't even tell you how just prayerfully thankful I am. But now I realize that even if I screw up, even if I trip and fall, God will raise up my children to take my place. And they'll inherit what was supposed to be for me. The people who came out of Exodus were supposed to go directly to the promised land and have the milk and honey and eat of the vines that they didn't grow and the gardens that they didn't plant. And they lost it. And their children got it instead. And they wandered in the wilderness for 40 years. Now, yes, they but pastor, didn't they still have the man every day? Yeah, they did. Can you imagine the patience of God to supernaturally provide manna and birds for 40 years just so mommy and daddy can get what's coming to them? I love that God don't play. He's like, nah, you could wait. You know, I God's got God's got an eternity to make sure that the people who get the inheritance are the ones that have the faith to hold it. Pastor Rick, when I was a young when I was a young man, Pastor Rick used to say, Don't let your gift take you where your character won't keep you because you'll lose it. That rings so true in this moment. An entire generation of parents lost the they lived the 10 plagues. They walked the Red Sea. They make it to the mountain and they get distracted by the golden calf. And that cost them the inheritance. The children who were kids during that time, they got to walk the Red Sea and the dry ground of the Jordan because they weren't responsible for leadership. They were responsible to follow their parents. But the parents, they lost it. Verse eight, after the whole nation had been circumcised, they remained where they were in camp until they were healed. Well, yes, nobody wants to get snipped and then have to go fight the next day. Nobody wants that. Interesting that God used the fear of the Canaanites to protect his children while they reestablished the sign of a covenant. Can I tell you that's exactly what the fear does? No, it is what the fear accomplishes. If you're also accomplishes the whole driving out ahead of you. Verse nine, then the Lord capital letters said to Joshua, Today, I have rolled away the reproach of Egypt from you. So the place has been called Gilgal to this day. That makes no sense in English. So let me explain it to you. The word rolled away in Hebrew is galal. The place where they're at is Gilgal. You see the difference in Hebrew? There's a play on words phonetically that just doesn't translate in our language. Rolled away does not sound like Gilgal. Eminem, I don't think could make those two go together in Hebrew. In Hebrew, however, galal and Gilgal sound very similar. So that's what verse nine is. There's nothing really like spooky in there. It's just the nature of the Hebrew language versus our language today. When I get to this section, I have to ask myself how many times has wandering in the wilderness and disobedience kept me from inheritance that God wanted me to have? How many how many times did I have the opportunity to just trust God? And if the funny thing is, is you won't know like Miss Nancy, we're not going to know until we make it to Judgment Day and Jesus opens the book of Nancy Thomas. It's like, hey, check this out. Then you'll know how many opportunities you missed. We were not omniscient beings like God. I can't look back into the past, but I can make a commitment today to just not miss any. Try to not miss any obedient opportunities because you don't know what that wilderness pattern can cost you and and leave years of circling letter D. Salvation remembered is salvation. We live. This is verse 10 on the evening of the 14th day of the month while they camped at Gilgal on the plains of Jericho. You notice the specificity there. Time of day. What day of the month? The location of his people. The Israelites celebrated the Passover. Steven, I'll be honest, this one, I didn't understand why this versus in the middle of this chapter. But anytime I come across something like that, I'm like, OK, I don't get this. Well, let's let's deep dive. Why is it important that they remember the Passover in this moment? Two things that I think are worthy to share. Number one, this is only the third time the children of Israel have celebrated the Passover since Exodus. They didn't celebrate. There's no record that they celebrated the Passover during the 40 year wilderness wandering. They were saved from slavery at Exodus that coming out of Egypt. The second Passover is at the foot of Mount Sinai. And the third Passover is here at Gilgal. That 40 year gap in between. They didn't stop to remember what God had done for them. The disobedient parent generation didn't stop to put God first. They just wondered because they were faithless. They didn't follow. That reminds me, how many times do I stop and specifically try to recall the things that God has done? How many times do I stop and recall the things God has done and remind my children like the memorials from last chapter? In this moment, they are not only re-putting the sign of the covenant into their flesh as a nation. They are also remembering what God had done for them as a nation by celebrating the Passover. And this will be interesting. If they didn't celebrate the Passover for the 40 years in the wilderness, There is an entire generation of young Israelites who were born during the 40 year wilderness wandering. Who have no idea who their God is and all the great things he's done for them. They've never heard the Exodus story because they don't do the Passover. They didn't hear about the 10 plagues. Maybe they heard rumblings of her stories. Jim, that's just what old people say. That never really happened. Like somebody trying to tell me World War II never happened. What? 40 years, a brand new generation, the generation who's about to actually move in and inherit the promised land, Never celebrated the Passover, never remembered the night that God saved a nation from death. That God saved them and brought them out. I just, once I found that out, I was like, wow, they really need to remember their spiritual heritage Before they receive their spiritual inheritance. Then letter E provision accompanies inheritance. This is verse 11. The day after the Passover, that very day, they ate some of the produce of the land unleavened bread and roasted grain. Verse 12, the manna stopped. The day after they ate this food from the land. There was no longer any manna for the Israelites. But that year, they ate the produce of Canaan. So in order to really see this in full context, you got to see when the manna showed up. And you also got to see when it stopped. The manna was never intended to be Israel's existence. It was a stopgap of subsistence to deal with their disobedience. See, if the children of Israel had left Exodus, And Barry, if you, me and John and Jim, if we were all faithful spies and we spied out the land and said, absolutely, God's going to give us this land. You wouldn't have the 40 year wilderness wandering. You wouldn't have the supernatural manna because what you would have had is covenant people trusting in a covenant God. But because of the disobedience of the faithless parental generation, they receive this spiritual manna. They complain about it, right? You're literally getting supernatural food and you're complaining about it. And then when they reach the promised land, the place they were always supposed to go, the manna stops. What else does that mean? That means that they actually have to work for the food to grow it from the land. Living by the supernatural day to day isn't enough because it wasn't the plan. The plan was bring God's people to their land and let them eat from the land he has provided for them. God is still providing for his people. It's no longer daily supernatural provision. It's more what we would call natural provision because God said you're going to drink from vineyards you didn't plant. You're going to eat from gardens or vineyards. You didn't grow gardens. You didn't plant live in houses. You didn't build live in city. God had planned for them to inherit a fully functional land so that on day one. They could start the process of planting and harvesting and reaping. They wouldn't be just empty, fallow field. The manna stopped because the children of Israel had finally reached the place they were supposed to reach 40 years ago. And somebody has got to be thinking, well, why? Why isn't God just giving us miracles anymore? That's a legitimate question, right? If we were children, right? Our children have grown up. Anybody in this room who's under the age of 40. Okay. Or let's just say every L.L.S. who were born in the 1900s. Our children were born into a world where God fed them miraculously every day. And now he doesn't. You don't think that was a big parental question. Hey, I thought you said God we were God's chosen people. And I've grown up every single day. And knowing that we go out and we collect manna and then on the day before the Sabbath, we collect twice as much. And now all of a sudden, gone. But mom, why do we have to grow grapes? Where's the manna? Why do we have to watch the sheep? Where's the manna? I thought we were God's chosen people. Where's the manna? The manna became the focus when it was never supposed to be the goal. They were supposed to receive this land that God had promised hundreds of years ago. That they would have. They were supposed to be his people in his land, eating provisionally from what he provided, not supernaturally from what they collected. Then letter F. Submission determines success. Here's the here's the really cool scene at the end of this chapter. Verse 13. Now, when Joshua was near Jericho, already he's decided that's the first city that they're going to take. He looked up and saw a man in front of him with a drawn sword in his hand. Joshua went up to him and asked, Are you for us or for our enemies? This is the what's up, bro moment in the book of Joshua. Joshua looks out there. I mean, he's apparently healed, feeling a lot better at this point. Actually, no, since Joshua came out of Egypt, he would have already been circumcised. So he's one of the few men who doesn't have to be healed. And he stands there and he sees a person with a sword. And his first question is. What's up, bro? You with me or not? The answer, however, notice that the character here doesn't answer. He says neither. Joshua asks a two sided question. Are you for us or for you? Those who are against us? And the guy says neither. And then he says this. And then he says this. But as commander of the army of the Lord, capital letters, I have now come. Joshua fell face down on the ground in reverence and asked him, What does my Lord have for his servant? And then fifteen, the commander of the Lord's army replied, Take off your sandals for the place where you are standing is holy. This is in theological terms is called a theophany or a Christ often. This is an incarnate appearance of God to his people before Jesus was born as a human in the New Testament. I personally believe this is a Christ often, meaning this is the second member of the Trinity, the person we know as Jesus Christ. Of course, the second member of the Trinity is eternal, right? Because he's got so before the second member of the Trinity, God, the son was born in human form to the Virgin Mary in the first or four B.C. God, the son, the second member of the Trinity has existed for all time. This is an appearance of God to Joshua in the promised land before they take the city. How do I know that? The very last line in verse fifteen, take off your sandals for where you are standing is holy. There is only one being in all of creation whose very presence makes things holy. Who is it? God. Now, can I tell you there's a perfect argument for the distinction between this being appearance of God the father or God the son or God the Holy Spirit? Technically, it could be all three. Here's why I'm going to tell you I think it's actually God the son. Second member, it's the title commander of the Lord's army in the New Testament when Jesus is in the Garden of Gethsemane and he is being crucified. The New Testament says Jesus had the ability to call to himself an army of angels. He was the commander of an army of angels. This character here is God who makes things holy and is the commander of God's army. To me, that establishes reasons for why I can see this as what we call an appearance of the pre incarnate Christ. It's Jesus. He hasn't gotten the name Jesus yet because that doesn't happen until the New Testament. But the God the son, second member of the Trinity is an eternal being who's been around since the beginning of creation. This is Jesus, which is interesting because the most literal translation of Jesus's Hebrew name. So what's Jesus's Hebrew name? Anybody? Yeshua. What is the direct translation from Hebrew to English? Yeshua turns into Joshua. This is literally Joshua saying to Joshua, yo, you with me? And Joshua says back to Joshua, nah, I'm the king of the Lord's army. It's literally what this is. This is a Joshua on Joshua conversation. Jesus appears to Joshua. After they're in the land, they've crossed the river, they've recommitted to the sign of the covenant, and they have re remembered their salvation from. Then Jesus shows up. And what is the what is what is Jesus's answer to Joshua's question? If you would allow me to extemporaneously paraphrase, Joshua is saying, are you with me or you against me? And Jesus says you're asking the wrong question. Are you with me? See, so many times we want God to be on our side of what we are doing. I get people who text me, they call me, pastor, I have a job interview. Will you please pray that God gives me this job? That's you wanting God on your side. The very first thing I always ask, did you ask God if he wants you to have that job? See, you put on the reverse. It's not a question of whether God is with Israel. Of course he is. He has already gone ahead of them. He has already part of the waters. He's driving them out. Of course God is going ahead of them. The question is, Joshua, are you with me? Are you for God or do you just want God to be for you? Do you want God backing your play? Do you want God giving you what you want when you want it? Are you stopping to ask God, do I want what you want for me? See, that puts the cart before the horse. Am I chasing what God wants for my life or am I just asking God to give me what I already want? Those are two completely different questions. And that's really what's in face here. So I will submit to you that verse 13, verse 14, and verse 15 are an example of a pre-incarnate Jesus before he is born as God in human flesh. He is still 100% fully divine God. And here he appears to Joshua as his commander form and commander of the Lord's army. And he says the same thing to Joshua that God said to Moses in the burning bush. Take off your sandals for where you're standing is holy. Thematically that also connects the two. That's why if you're ever studying the Bible, you should never separate the Exodus story from the land. One is meant to go to the other. You go out of some place to go into some place. Studying one devoid of the other, you miss all these beautiful connections that the Bible is clearly putting in our path. So what does the theophany or the Christophany mean? Joshua frames the question asking if God was with them when the real question was if they were with God. How many times in our lives today do we make the same mistake? Do we go, huh, man, I wish God would fill in the blank instead of asking God, is that what you want me to do? Am I going in the right direction to follow where God is leading? Not will God let me go where I've already chosen to go? And all of this while they are in enemy territory, healing from circumcision before the first military campaign has ever happened. God is in the very first verse of this chapter, God prepares the land for his people in verse two to verse fifteen. God is preparing his people for the land. Verse one, God prepares the land for his people. Two through fifteen. God prepares the people for the land. What does that mean for you and I today? Because of the amazing gift of Jesus's sacrifice on Calvary, we already have an eternal destination and a kingdom. God has already done all of the work to redeem us from the corrupt world that we live in, to give us the power of the Holy Spirit indwelt within us, to live in a corrupt world for him. But you can absolutely live in this world and be faithless and distracted, just like the entire wilderness generation. Be so distracted by what's going on at the earthly level that you stop comparing it to what's going on in the spiritual level. Be so distracted with the natural world that we stop realizing we live in a spiritual world. And I'm not saying that we need to go to a place where there's a demon under every rock. But to ignore the reality that demons are real is also biblically illiterate. Not to live in a world where we realize we live in a world full of sin and corruption. That doesn't mean we don't have to deal with temptation and strive to live godly. We live in this tension, in this moment, because in the next kingdom, that ain't gonna be there. That's the official term. That ain't gonna be there. So here's your takeaway. And then Mel, we can do questions for like 10 minutes. Maybe 15. Here's your takeaway. God's promises never expire, but a whole generation missed it. Submission is what gets you from delivered to inherited. Right? I said that when I wrote this message the first time. I was like, ouch! I don't like the idea of submission. I don't like the idea that I don't get to pick what I want to do. I don't like the idea that I don't get to pick where I get to live. I don't like the idea that I don't get to pick how I get to teach my children about the world. No, I don't get any of that. He chose those directions. He's in charge. I'm not. Either you are on the bus that Jesus is driving or you are lying to yourself about being a Christian. There's no way I can say that nicer. If Jesus is not king of your life. And we had this conversation at my dining room table this week. There is a difference between cerebrally or intellectually understanding that Jesus is God. That's an intellectual act. And volitionally or an act of your will, your ability to choose. You can know Jesus is God and not choose to obey him. Demons do that. It is logically possible for you to know that Jesus is a historical figure. You might even believe that Jesus is the God who created the whole world. You might even believe that the Bible is God's word. You might even go to church every single day. But if you don't submit your will to him, you do not have the sign of the covenant in your heart. Because in the New Testament, praise Jesus, we all don't have to be circumcised to be New Testament Christian. The circumcision is now of the heart. The circumcision is now of the heart. Jeremiah said, I will give my people a new heart. Look forward to it in the New Testament, our heart. What Jesus wants is not just your verbal praise, not just your money, not just your service. He wants your submission. That is an act of the will. Something I choose to give to him that says, no, Lord, what you want for my life is better than what I want for my life. And I choose your design over my desire. Go all the way back to Eden. That's the quintessential human problem. We struggle giving God submission. If you do not, and I'm just going to point this out, if you struggle to give God your submission, you might just be handing the inheritance God intended for you to your kids. And you can wander for the rest of your life and never really get. And then you blame God. Well, Nancy, God, God told me I was going to get such and such. God told us we were going to move into Canaan. Yes, that was when God was planning on you actually being obedient. God's word is still true. Guess what? Your grandkids will have that Canaanite back 40 mansion. And you can wander in the wilderness for 40 years because we didn't give our submission to God. How many people genuinely want to experience God but not submit to him? I would say a lot. Because if I'm only speaking from my own personal experience, giving Jesus my submission is the hardest thing I have ever had to do in my life. Because it grates against my wants. It grates against my desires. Some of those desires are sinful, and some of those desires aren't necessarily sinful. I would love to be rich. No one's going to amen that point. Y'all are so holy. Listen, y'all are so holy on a Sunday. Just just just ask yourself. You wake up tomorrow and your bank balance is times 10. How many people are having a bad day? That'd be great. I did not choose a career field that's going to, you know, have me rubbing elbows in vacationing with Elon Musk. That's just not going to happen. So that's not something my life will ever have. Does that mean that my desire to work hard and want to provide for my family's evil or bad? No, that's it. That's a good thing. I want to provide. I want to be able to take my wife on vacations. I want to be able to buy my children nice things, things I didn't have. Those are good fatherly desires. But if I gave in to that desire and the only thing that I valued was money, and I would do whatever it took just to get that next dollar, can you see how all of a sudden following that leads to a really dark path? No, I have to submit to God and go, no, God has given me what he gave me. He's provided for my family, but he's called me to live here, not there. So I got to give that up. I don't ever plan to wake up with a billion dollars in my bank account. If anyone would like to give an offering to the church, we're going to do that later. But there are desires within me that I know are not godly. You have to tame them and hold them and submit them. The New Testament says, take every thought captive and submit it. Make it submit to Christ. That means, Steve, maybe I have some thoughts that aren't necessarily so Christ-like, and you've got to grab it and submit it and bring it back down. So just understand that if you choose not to submit to God, your children may get the blessing that it was supposed to be for you.
