# Transcript: What Happens Next   Grad Sunday 2026   05 31 2026
Date: 2026-06-02

---

Well, good morning. Welcome to Catalyst. I'm Dr. Bill. Thank you so much for being a part of our church, whether you are here on our Wilmington campus or you are joining us online, either on the web, in the app, in the chat. Thank you for being a part of our extended family. As you saw, today's a little bit of a unique standalone Sunday because we are going to be honoring those who have completed certain levels of academic achievement. I have to say that I think it is very on-brand for us as a church to be abnormal. And I think it's amazing that out of our little 100-person church, we are recognizing nine graduations this year. So first off, just give yourselves a hand because that's amazing. (*applause*) I am going to do my best to give you an abbreviated sermon this morning, Ms. June. I'm going to try to not run to full length because I think graduation offers us a unique perspective on life transition. Not just because graduations happen, yes, they do. And it's often at times of graduation where graduates are faced with some major transition moments. If it's the high school graduation, you're transitioning from living at home to possibly traveling and going to a college, living on campus. If it's a bachelor's graduation, you're most likely transitioning from that early college stage, either into the workforce or into the graduate level studies. If you're graduating at the graduate level, you're most likely preparing for a career transition. But those are not the only kinds of transitions we experience in life. And so I would be remiss if I said that it's only graduates who experience transition. I think we all do in various stages at different times. So to try to kind of honor and step into the theme of today, I titled my sermon, What Comes Next? In those moments of transition, what comes next? The text for our sermon today will be Deuteronomy chapter 31, verses one through eight. Now the easiest way to follow along will be to use the Catalyst app. So those of you who are here on campus, if you have the app, if you open it up and scroll down, you'll see a blue square that says sermon notes. You open that up, you will have all of my notes. There'll be a place to drop in your own notes and you'll be able to email those notes to yourself after church. Inside the sermon notes, you will also find a blue button that says, Ask a Question. I like to take questions. If you're new and you're joining us this morning for Graduate Sunday, I like to take questions while we teach. So if you want to ask a question, those questions will go to my wife. She will stack them up and then she will text them to me at the end of my teaching and we'll try to address some of those questions. Since we're going to be in the book of Deuteronomy and it's a standalone Sunday, why don't we remind ourselves of the Bible story of how we get from the beginning of the Bible to Deuteronomy 31. If you're new to Catalyst, you can join us online. You can send a kind of a call and response part of our service. I'm gonna ask a question and I'm gonna leave a blank and if you know the answer, you shout it out. So here we go. In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth and onto the earth, he planted a garden in a place called Eden. And into the garden of Eden, he placed two human beings, Adam and Eve. Adam and Eve willfully disobeyed God, bringing sin and corruption in the world and they are cast out of the garden. That's Genesis chapters one, two, and three. Humanity begins to grow and sin begins to run rampant. God regrets, made humanity, decides to send a flood. In order to save living, air breathing creatures from this flood, he chooses a very specific man and he tells that man to build an ark and to board that ark and through that ark, salvation from the flood will happen. That man's name is Noah. Noah had how many sons? Three, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. See, Casey, I gotta keep you on your toes because we're only going so far. So, Shem, Ham, Japheth, Noah, and their wives, they all board the ark. They're on the ark, then the ark lands, humanity restarts and humanity begins to re-spread about the earth. God still sees corruption in his creation and so he decides to make a covenant. He finds a man living in a place called Ur, you are, in Mesopotamia. And he finds this man and he says, listen, this is the new international bill version of what he says. He's like, yo, you're gonna be my people, I'm gonna be your God. I'm gonna bless those who curse you, I'm gonna curse those who bless you, curse those who curse you. I'm gonna give you land to your descendants as a forever inheritance and from that nation that comes from you, the whole world will be blessed and then God changes homies name from Abram to Abraham. And that's why we call that the Abrahamic covenant. God makes a covenant with a man named Abram, changes it to Abraham. God then repeats that covenant promise to the younger of Abraham's two sons. So who is the second person that God repeats that covenant promise to? Isaac. God then repeats the covenant promise a third time or second repeat, says it third time to the younger of Isaac's two sons whose name is Jacob. Jacob then has many sons and they become who we know as the 12 tribes of Israel. Sometime as his boys are growing up, as boys tend to be boys and they tend to pick on each other, things escalate rather quickly to where 11 brothers sell one of their younger brothers into slavery and they send him into Egypt as a slave. He's there for anywhere from 13 to maybe 17 years where God works through his character, he rises through the ranks, he starts as a slave, he becomes second in command of the nation of Egypt and God placed him there to save his father and his brothers and his nieces and his nephews and their entire family from a famine. The name of the young man who was sent into Egypt as a slave and became second to the king, Joseph. That's just the book of Genesis. Then God's people all move into Egypt, into the land of Goshen, that was good, got that one. They move to the land of Goshen because the Egyptians don't like sheep herders, they think they're very dirty, they're very gross and so they give them their own little land. So God creates an Egyptian incubator in which to insulate his people so they can grow. They go into Egypt as a family, God is gonna call them out of Egypt as a nation. So they move in, a Pharaoh shows up who doesn't remember what God did or what Joseph did, enslaves God's people, they begin to murder their children, they cry out for a deliverer, God said, "'Okay, now it's time. "'I'm gonna give you a deliverer.'" He was born as a slave, raised in the palace, learned ministry in the hill countryside of Midian and for 40 years married a lady named Zipporah. The deliverer of Israel in the Exodus story's name is Moses. His older brother's name is Aaron. Their older sister's name is Miriam. Then God works through Moses and delivers his people from Egypt, that's the beginning of the book of Exodus. Then they're leaving Egypt after the 10 plagues, they make it to a body of water, there's water in front of them, the Egyptian army is inbound behind them and God tells Moses to take his staff and he places it in the water and God caused a strong east wind to blow and stand the water up to where they could walk on dry ground. The name of the body of water that the children of Israel cross when they leave Egypt is the Red Sea. They cross the Red Sea and they come to the foot of a mountain that Moses will go up to to receive the law from God. They camped at the foot of Mount Sinai. That's why we call that the Sinatic covenant. So they camp at the foot of Mount Sinai and man oh man oh man I wish I could tell you they just did everything right, but they don't. Moses is up on the mountain, Joshua went up there with him and Aaron is down at the foot of the mountain making the golden calf while the children of Israel worship in idolatry and God just say is less than pleased. And so because of this disobedience, they now have to wander in the wilderness to where the entire adult generation who experienced the 10 plagues of Egypt cannot move into the promised land except for two people. First, how many years is the wilderness wandering? 40 years. Second, what is the name of the two people who experienced the exodus of Egypt who also moved into the promised land? I'll take either one. Joshua and what's the other one? Caleb, that's right. Joshua and Caleb are the only two people who were adults at that time, military age, who still got to move into the land. That's the end of Exodus, Leviticus gives you the law. The word Deuteronomy is literally second law. At the end of that 40 year wilderness wandering, God repeats the law and that's what Deuteronomy is and that's where we find ourselves in the text today. We are at the end of the book of Deuteronomy in a transition moment where we are about to watch the transition of leadership from the nation of Israel being led by Moses who led them out of Egypt and will now be led by Joshua, leading them into the land of Canaan. The setting for the passage that we're about to read is this. Joshua is appointed the next leader of Israel after Moses during the 40 year wilderness wandering after the exodus of Egypt. That's why I wanted to do the story so that when I put all those details in there, all those details are like your mental mile markers. So you know like anybody like to, you don't raise your hand, but anybody like to watch, binge watch really silly shows on Netflix that's got like umpteen million seasons. My wife and I like to watch mysteries at the museum because it makes perfect nap sounds and so you just put mysteries on the museum on and all of a sudden that guy, I don't even know, I don't remember what he's talking about. It's some parachute from some prison escape and I'm like, so. But there's like 38 different seasons and if you don't leave yourself some mile markers, you're gonna get completely lost in what he's talking about. Those big events in scripture are the same way. There are certain mile markers that we should follow and the 40 year wilderness wandering, that's a big mile marker. The exodus, it's a big mile marker. Here, Joshua's being appointed the next leader after Moses during the end of the 40 year wilderness wandering after the exodus from Egypt. The focus of my message this morning is that God goes before you, trust to believe, but obey him enough to follow. So let's watch this. First, let's read Deuteronomy 31, the first eight verses. Then after we've read it, we'll go back and walk through it verse by verse. Here we go. Deuteronomy 31 starting in verse one. Then Moses went out and spoke these words to all Israel. I am now 120 years old and I am no longer able to lead you. The Lord has said to me, you shall not cross the Jordan. The Lord, your God himself, will cross over ahead of you. He will destroy these nations before you and you will take possession of their land. Joshua also will cross over ahead of you as the Lord said. And the Lord will do to them what he did to Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, whom he'd destroyed along with their land. Verse five, the Lord will deliver them to you and you must do to them all that I have commanded you. Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid or terrified because of them for the Lord, your God, goes with you. He will never leave you nor forsake you. Verse seven, then Moses summoned Joshua and said to him in the presence of all Israel, be strong and courageous for you must go with this people into the land that the Lord swore to their ancestors to give them and you must divide it among them as their inheritance. The Lord himself goes before you and will be with you. He will never leave you nor forsake you. Do not be afraid, do not be discouraged. Let's rewind, let's take this back to verse one. The first point you see there in my notes is this, transition is not a detour, it's the journey. Transition is not a detour, it's the journey. There are moments in life where transition happens that doesn't mean, I mean just think about this way, have you ever been driving down the highway, going somewhere and you see a road sign that tells you something's construction or there's something up ahead that you didn't know was coming? That only ever happened to me, that's why. We get this mistaken impression sometimes that because we can't see things coming in our lives that God must be surprised when we're surprised. But think about that for a second, if God is surprised when something happens to me next week, then that means I'm admitting God didn't know, John, God didn't know that thing was gonna happen next week? No, one of the hardest things for me to accept is God can absolutely know bad things are coming and sometimes he doesn't let me know they're coming. Sometimes God doesn't tell me there's a detour after exit mile marker five. I just run into it, I find out about it. There are moments in life where transition will happen and it is part of the journey. Look at this, verse one. Then Moses went out and spoke all these words to Israel. That verse only makes sense if you let me read what comes before it. Remember, when scripture was written, there were no chapter and verse notations, right? Reading the book of Deuteronomy, this was originally written on a scroll. Moses didn't stop and go, you know what, Doug, this chapter 31, he just wrote. We later broke it down into chapters, broke it down into verses so we as Christians could do what we're doing today and study one specific little section. If we didn't have chapter and verse notations and everybody brought their own scroll, handwritten by the way, how, Tasha, how would we know where to find? Like, I can't just say, well, open your scrolls to line 768. What if the guy who wrote your scroll was like nearsighted and he wrote with really big letters and somebody else was really, really farsighted and they're like, micro print. Somebody's got the whole book of Deuteronomy on a napkin. I couldn't do that. But if we have these chapters and verse notations, we jump in. So chapter 31, verse one reads, then Moses went out and spoke all these words to Israel. But here's the text that I didn't show you that happens before the text. It's not gonna be on the screen. I just wanna read it really fast. This is Deuteronomy chapter 30. These are the verses coming into what I just read. This is God speaking to Moses. Now, what I am commanding you today is not too difficult or beyond your reach. It is not up in heaven so that you have to ask who will ascend to heaven and get it and proclaim to us that we may obey it. Nor is it beyond the sea so that you have to ask who will cross the sea to get it and proclaim it to us so that we may obey. No, the word is very near you. It is in your mouth. It is in your heart so that you may obey it. See, I set before you today life and prosperity, death and destruction. For I command you today to love the Lord your God, to walk in obedience to him, to keep his commands, decrees and laws. Then you will live and increase and the Lord your God will bless you in the land you are entering to possess. But if your heart turns away and you are not obedient, if you are drawn away to bow down to other gods and worship them, I declare to you this day that you will certainly be destroyed. You will not live long in the land you are crossing the Jordan to enter and possess. This day I call the heavens and earth as witnesses against you that I have set before you life and death, blessings and curses. Now choose life so that you and your children may live, that you may love the Lord your God, listen to his voice and hold fast to him for the Lord is your life and he will give you many years in the land he swore to give to your fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And then verse one, then Moses went out and spoke these words to all his. So see verse one doesn't make any sense unless I tell you what God told Moses that Moses then went and told them. The entire book of Joshua hinges on the understanding that there is an obedience to receive blessing. God said, I go before you, I'm gonna give you, I will move them out. But God made it super clear, go all the way back to Abraham. Abraham knew, if you go back to what is it, Genesis like 14, 15, 16, somewhere in there, Abraham was told that your people are going to go in Egypt, they'll be slaves but I will not forget them and I will bring them to the land that I have promised. But you gotta obey. So in verse one, when you read, then Moses went out and spoke these words to these people, the setting that Moses opens with is the choose life speech from Deuteronomy 30. I set before you today the choice, life or death, blessings or curses, building or destruction. That's the entire setting that Joshua takes over in is the choice to choose life. God's blessing is muted but it is given through obedience. Then we get to verse two. I am now 120 years old and I am no longer able to lead you. Here's the moment of transition for Moses. One of the things I found really interesting as I was studying for this morning is Moses and Aaron were in their 80s when they went to Pharaoh to say, let my people go. Just think about that for a second. The number one thing that we associate with Moses, the number one thing throughout all of history that he's remembered for, homie didn't do until he was 80 years old. I mean, that's like almost as old as Jim, right? So all that Jim has done this far really doesn't mean much, does it? All that Moses went through the first 40 years of being raised as a slave and then educated in a palace, the next 40 years in Midian being a shepherd, meeting Zipporah, having his children, meeting his father-in-law, all of that was an 80 year preamble to being where God wanted him to be in that moment. Moses's life itself is a beautiful portrait of God working through transition. And now he gets to say, I am 120 years old and I'm no longer able to lead you, the Lord. And anybody who's looking at their physical Bible or the notes in the app, you notice all those letters are capitalized. What does it mean when we read in an English Bible and all the letters are capitalized? That's the covenant name for God. That's God's special covenant name with his people. The Lord, meaning the covenant God of Israel has said to me, you shall not cross the Jordan. Now, if you know the Exodus story, you know that the plan was they were supposed to leave Egypt and go directly to the promised land. There wasn't supposed to be a 40 year detour. There was supposed to be a transition moment. Moses was supposed to lead them directly into the promised land. But because of their disobedience with the golden calf, and then ultimately because of Moses's disobedience during the wilderness wandering, when God told him to speak to a rock to give them water and out of his frustration, he struck the rock, being willfully disobedient, Moses is not allowed to lead them where they need to go either. When transition hits your life, is your first instinct to just go back to normal or is your first instinct to go, what is God doing and why are things changing? I will admit absolutely I'm in the former category. When things start looking like they're going off the rails, Anthony, my first instinct is to grab it and push it back into alignment because I am comfortable when things are the same. Right, ADHD Bill does not like it when things are distracting. I'm comfortable when every Monday's like every Monday, every Tuesday's like every Tuesday, every Wednesday's like every Wednesday. But there comes moments in life where things are going to change, where transition is going to happen and I'm not able to do the way I've always done it. This is that moment for Moses and all of Israel. You shall not cross the Jordan. Then let her be in your outline. Trust walks behind the God who leads. Trust walks behind the God who leads. This is verse three. The Lord, notice the covenant name there again, the Lord your God himself will cross over ahead of you. He will destroy these nations before you and you will take possession of the land. Stop. Did you notice the active actors in that sentence? God crosses ahead, but the people take the possession. The land was promised 400 years ago back when Abraham lived there and he bought the very first plot of land. He bought a cave at Machpelah to be able to bury his wife and ultimately he was buried there with his sons as well. That was the kind of like the down payment on the inheritance. But God said, I'm gonna bring your people back. Here in verse three, God is going to cross ahead of the people. God will destroy the nations before you and you will take possession of their land. Joshua will also, or Joshua also will cross ahead of you as the Lord has said. This is Moses saying this to the children of Israel as they conclude their 40 year wilderness wandering. Those who were kids who experienced the Exodus are now the ranking adults and now they're going to lead into the promised land and God is changing their leader. He's changing it from Moses to Joshua. And he tells them, I'm going ahead of you. I'm doing these things. Joshua is going ahead of you. Verse four, and the Lord will do to them, meaning the people who live in the land of Canaan, what he did to Sihon, Og, the kings of the Amorites, who he destroyed. It was always God's plan for his people to live in the land obediently and to serve him. We as human beings just really mess up God's plans. And sometimes he has to be a little more patient with us. And there's an entire generation that didn't get to inherit that promise. And then later, if you keep fast forwarding through the Bible, we get to the exile period where they're still not obedient in the land. And then God has to go put his kids in time out for 70 years. I need you to see that in verses three and four, all of God's actions are because of God's covenant. It's his covenant people that he's acting for and acting with. How many times in moments of transition in your life do you stop and frame the transition in your covenant relationship with God? Whether it's a job transition, whether it's a promotion, whether it's a changing of companies, whether it's a graduation and you're looking at a new job, whether it's a relocation and you're looking to a new town, whether it's a retirement and you're looking to go from work to retirement, how many times do we look at the transitions in our life and frame them in our relationship with God versus what does this do for me? We frame them on us instead of get out of the way and frame them on him. All of the transition in here is Israel framed with God's covenant. Let us see, blessing is on the other side of obedience. This is verse five. The Lord, covenant name again, will deliver them to you and you must do to them all I have commanded you. Again, God is the actor. That doesn't mean that they're not actually gonna have to fight, but God is the primary actor. Their job is to do what was commanded of them. Their job was to be obedient. So then when you get to verse six, we're gonna talk a lot about being strong and courageous because next week I actually start a series in the book of Joshua. So this was sort of like a nice way to give myself a prequel to the next sermon series and also have a standalone moment for transition. Verse six, be strong and courageous. If you only read be strong and courageous in a military sense, you are missing the theological point of God's people receiving God's land in covenant with him. If be strong and courageous is merely to say, Scott, Jim, Gary, strap up and get it done, then you could be left to the idea that Scott, you got all of God's promised land in your own strength, in your own ability, in your own power, in your own desire. But that's not what's happening here. Moses is transitioning at God's instruction to Joshua for them to lead and follow the plan that God has already set in motion. He has already given it. God's going before them. God is fighting for them. What is their primary responsibility? Obedience. Obedience to therefore receive. Verse six, do not be, excuse me, be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid or terrified because of them. That to me is a really powerful verse. How many times when transition happens in life is it the outside circumstances that make you the most afraid? That's okay. Nobody has to raise their hands. I'm sure it's me, right? Many times it's the things we face outside of us that bring the fear, bring the anxiety, bring the worry, bring the stress, bring conflict, and we forget to step back and frame our life within the covenant kingdom of God. All of the conflict that happens in my life happens within the frame of kingdom. Happens within the frame of my covenant relationship with Christ. Happens within the frame of my marriage centered on God. Happens within the frame of my service to this church as an overall part of God's kingdom. That's the frame of my life. The frame of my life is not that my property taxes went up and so somehow the devil is punishing me. That puts me as the center of my life. Be strong and courageous, buries within it an undertone of obedience, then what comes out of that, do not be afraid or terrified because of them. Why? Because the Lord, notice covenant name again, the Lord, your covenant God, your God goes with you. Why am I not able or why am I able to not fear those I stand up against? It's those I'm standing with. He's saying, don't fear them because I got your back. Don't fear the stress because God is with you. Now, you notice that buried into that is the assumption that you're actually doing what God wants. That you're actually in the right covenant relation with God. You're actually in right obedience with God. So many times we wanna pray for blessing. Oh God, man, if you could just bless me with that thing. Right? The number one thing that I find humorous after 20 years of ministry is the number of people who will call me or text me and ask me when they're having a job interview, will you priest pray for me? It's like I speak for a living. Will you priest pray for me? Will you pray? People will ask me to pray for them. Hey look, it's a different sentence. They will ask me to pray for them to get a new job. Absolutely. Are you gonna honor God with the money you get from that job? You gonna be obedient with it? Or do you just want the new job for you? Because how do you know that new opportunity is not being given to you as part of a larger kingdom stance? All of a sudden people stopped asking me to pray for their new job opportunity. So, be strong and courageous. Don't be afraid or terrified because of them because the Lord your God goes with you. And then the end of verse six, he will never leave you nor forsake you. The assumption built into verses five and six is that the blessing Israel would receive is on the other side of obedience. Too many times in our culture, we want the blessing first and then we decide if we want to obey. I'm sorry, that's not how the creation to creator relationship works. We as his beings do not dictate to the master of all cosmos what we deserve. He's the boss, we're just the workers. It's his field, not ours. It's his creation, not ours. This is his church, not mine. Blessing is on the other side of obedience. So, here's my question. If you are actively waiting on a blessing in your life, whether it's an opportunity, whether it's built into transition, whatever it is, are you tying obedience with what you're asking God for? Or are you just asking him because you're his favorite and you deserve it? Don't get me wrong, Melanie is God's favorite, right? So, let's just be honest. Everybody else is pitching for second. Letter D, your future rests on the promises that you stand on today. Here's verses seven and eight. As we bring this in, this is the final thing. Verse seven, then Moses summoned Joshua and said to him in the presence of all Israel. So, here's Moses transitioning out, brings Joshua in, says to Joshua in front of all the witnesses of Israel, be strong and courageous, for you must go with this people. Jim, that's hilarious. Moses has just spent 40 years wandering in the wilderness with a disobedient Israel and he's handing it over to Joshua. He says, John, be strong and courageous because you got him now. Be strong and courageous for you must go with this people into the land that the Lord, covenant name, Lord, swore to their ancestors to give them. And you must divide it among them as an inheritance. Moses is hearkening all the way back to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. That's why all those mental mile markers and that Bible story game that we play all the time, that's why all this is important. Moses is hearkening back to the patriarchs and saying God promised then what he promised 400 years ago, you're walking into today. That should teach us two things. Number one, not everything you experienced was sowed in your life. Sometimes you're walking in at harvest season when three generations ago, people spent their knees in prayer, right? My parents happened to physically be here today. I can tell you without reservation that the faith of my life was laid down by those family members who prayed for me long before. My grandmother's not here, but I remember sitting in that we sat on the back like three from the end in the pew at central Baptist church and my grandmama would smack me in the back of my head if I wasn't listening to what the pastor said. Grandma was like, hey, there are times that we have to remember and this was something that occurred to me this week because I mean, most of you guys know me, with the ADHD, I can get really distracted of what's in front of me very easily and it can, boom, squirrel. We tend to think in immediateness because our lives are so short. We have to think about our own thoughts and plans in generations and we're busy worrying about Friday. Like the perspective that God has on the outcome of his kingdom is so much greater than my little life, than my little 80 years that I get to put into his kingdom when the promise that they are receiving in verse seven was given to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob because this is before Joshua was ever breathing air but it's Joshua's moment to be a part of God's plan and step up and transition leadership from Moses and now what Joshua will do was promised all the way back at Abraham. Be strong and courageous for you must go with these people into that land. The covenant God of Israel, Lord, swore to their ancestors to give them and now Joshua has a responsibility that was spoken about to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob that Joshua now has to go do. You must divide it among them as their inheritance. Who was the first person to receive the promise of the land? Abraham. Who actually receives the inheritance? The generation that goes in with Joshua and Caleb. That's a major transition that happened over generations. Sometimes we're so busy thinking about the next week, the next month, the next election cycle, the next time gas prices are gonna go down, the next, right? The next time grocery prices are gonna change. Very rarely do we take the moment to step back. What's the long game here? What's the long game? How do I do something today that ripple effects beyond my life? You know, my wife and I have talked several times about what do we think the greatest thing we could accomplish is? And I will admit, I've changed my ideas a lot, right? Early on in life, I thought the greatest thing I could do would be to pastor a big church. I don't want to do that. Too much details, too much. Then as I started going to school, I thought maybe the greatest thing I could do would be to gather a good education and be a great Bible teacher. I want to do that, but I don't think that's the greatest thing I can do. I think the greatest thing I can do is teach my children to love Jesus so much that my great grandchildren meet me in the kingdom in the next life. That's the ripple effect of God's covenant relationship getting you out beyond what's happening right now. The greatest thing I can do with my life is not turn our church into a bigger church. The greatest thing I can do with my life is teach my children and my son-in-law and my now new grandbaby to raise their children to love Jesus. To raise their children to love Jesus so much that the children who are born after I'm gone still meet me in the kingdom. Many of you know my mom passed away when I was a child. That means my mom never met my wife. My mom never met my children who are in all different places this morning. Means my mom's never gonna meet my grandkids, even though I will hopefully get to do that. But when we get to heaven, I'm gonna be able to introduce my mother and my grandmother to my grandchildren. That's worth fighting for. That's worth getting outside of ourselves and seeing the bigger game of God's covenant relationship. Verse eight, the Lord, there it is covenant again, himself goes before you and he will be with, I love the promises. The Lord himself goes before you and he will be with you. He will never leave you nor forsake you. Do not be afraid, do not be discouraged. If you are not rooting your courageousness in this life, in your relationship with God, you are found in your future on promises that will eventually fail. The only thing that's not gonna change is God's character and God's promises. Everything else, totally up for grabs. Roll the dice, who's winning today? I don't know, but I know that God's promises are true. Yesterday, today and forever. Israel in this moment of transition is walking in to receive a future that was promised centuries before. That doesn't mean they didn't have to be faithful in their day. We are standing in a church. In fact, today after church, and we're gonna take a picture outside, if you come down to this end of the building, you will see the cornerstone. I believe it says 1952. That's when this particular brick structure was built. The room you and I are sitting in today is the original building that was built in 1952. This part right here and the fellowship hall beneath is the original part of our church. Where the offices are and the kids' floor and all that, that was an expansion done later. The building you and I are sitting in right now, we inherited from the generation that came before us. The ministry that we're doing today, the really cool little, the raised up stand that Mr. Phil and the other men built, the camera back there that's doing the live stream, all of that sits on the foundation that was laid 75 years ago. All of that sits on the foundation that we didn't build, we didn't pay for, but what did we do? We inherited it. This building itself is a testament to the reality is we gotta realize that in these moments of transition, we've gotta stop thinking, Nancy, what's just good for me? What's just good for me in this moment? No, what's the overall plan that God has? And how do I get in line with what he's doing? Because he's been working a lot longer than me. And let's be honest, Rob, God has a way better track record than you and me together. You and me together in a pack full of monsters, we could get into some really good trouble. Just saying. But in this moment, Joshua is taking over from Moses, not because Joshua wants to be famous. In fact, it was God who selected Joshua. It was God who called Moses. He was also God who made covenant promises 400 years before these jokers were ever born. Do we often stop and think in moments of transition, how am I the supporting character in God's story versus what is God doing in my story? I think that's a much more American way to think about it, right? Jim, what's God doing in our story? Because obviously, I'm the main character in this story. Obviously, Jim is the main character of his story. Obviously, Scott is the main character of his story. Or are all of us just supporting characters in the bigger story? We need to tie ourselves to God's story and see that every one of us has a part to play in a much larger narrative that started all the way back in Genesis and is gonna carry us all the way through to the end of Revelation 22. And we're just the supporting cast from this season. Right? You got 38, 66 different seasons in scripture. And every one of those seasons has a bunch of different episodes. And here we are, this is our season, but we're not writing the whole story from beginning to end. It's in these moments of transition that we should ask ourselves, how is what I'm going through fit into God's greater story? Because you could live your whole life thinking that you're the main character of your story. You will go to hell for it, literally. I don't want that. You could live your whole life thinking you're the most important person and forget. The cosmos already has a king. Like the job of king and kings is not open for enrollment. Jesus is not looking to see if he can just take a vacation and hand somebody else the throne of the universe. He's the main story, he's the main character. Where in our transition do we fit in? Here's your takeaway as I bring this in for landing. Don't anybody get up yet, we're still gonna do questions, but here's your takeaway if you wanna start sending me whatever questions we have. You don't always need to know where you're going, but you need to be sure who you're following. In moments of transition, we wanna know everything, right? When you're moving to a new town, you gotta know everything. Mellie and I have relocated several times in the 20 years we've been married and we had several rules for when we would decide where we needed to move. This is gonna date me a little bit, but here it is. Whenever we would decide to move somewhere, if we're looking for an apartment or we're looking for a house, there's a couple things we gotta have. We gotta know where the nearest pizza place is. Got to, because Jesus be loving some pizza. We needed to know where the closest video rental store was because that's how old I am, right? Had to know, what was the other one? It was pizza, the video rental store, what? And a Target or a Walmart, gotta know where your store is. As long as I can find those three things, where's the nearest place to rent a movie, where do I get a pizza, and where's the Walmart or Target? That little triangle tells me where I can live. And all of those aren't necessarily bad, but the reason we moved from town to town was because of his story, not ours. Finding our location in town, that was our responsibility. In the same way, I don't expect you to know every day, especially for the graduates who are here today. There's a big wide world of future out ahead of all of us, not just you, but in this moment of transition, where you're transitioning out of and finishing a really big season, and transitioning into a new season. The temptation to want to understand every possible minute detail is absolutely there. But if you give into it too much, you end up building your life around you, instead of around him. You don't scale back and zoom out the camera far enough to go, what is God doing in this moment, and how do I get on board with that story? Instead of, well, I've made it here, this is what I want. So you don't always need to know where you're going, but you need to be sure who you're following.
