# Transcript: Joshua   Ch5   Qa
Date: 2026-07-20

---

First question of the day. What is supernatural provision? Is that another way of saying God? So I assume the questioner is talking about when I was referring to manna as supernatural provision. So in the story of the wilderness wandering, God provided for his children to eat by supernaturally or again what is supernatural? Supernatural is God stepping into and interrupting the natural flow of creation. That's what a miracle is. An interruption of the natural flow of creation. God caused food to literally miraculously appear for his children for 40 days. What would supernatural provision look like today? Number one, it would look like miraculous intervention. I absolutely believe miracles are possible today. You are welcome to debate me in that afterwards if you like, but I absolutely believe miracles are possible. I have also never experienced a full-blown out miracle that I can see clearly. What I have experienced is God's authority in, what's the word, not miraculous but providential. Thank you. Good job, Mel. Providential. When God puts his thumb on the scale and does things within our world system, like getting that guy in a town I've never met to send me that email to get me to this job, to move me to Delaware. That wasn't supernatural because God didn't suspend or interrupt the laws of nature in order for Bill to send me that email. He used natural things that exist in our world, but he lined up the dominoes and then knocked them over and he providentially led somewhere. So that would be providential provision, but the question is asking specifically, what is supernatural provision? Supernatural provision is when God works a miracle with his authority to override the natural laws of our world to provide for you in some way. If it's not overriding or interrupting the laws of nature, then I'm more comfortable with the term providential than miraculous because he's not changing the laws of our universe. Second question, if their parents didn't trust God, how then did the new generation learn to trust God and welcome being circumcised? Oh, to this questioner, I love you. This is such a good question. Number one, remember we're talking generationally. The generation wasn't faithful. That doesn't mean every individual within that generation was faithless. What's my greatest example? Joshua and Caleb. They were faithful the entire time. So there could very well be, and also there were children who were non-military fighting age who came out of Egypt and also moved into Canaan. Yusuf, how old are you today? 24. Okay, so you were probably already military age. Ethan, you're in here somewhere, right? How old are you? 14. Okay, Ethan's gonna be my example. Ethan is young enough that he would have, if we were the generation coming out of Egypt, Ethan would have experienced the 10 plagues. He would have remembered the first and the second passovers. Ethan then would have wandered while June and Steve got got got on the on the on the wilderness wandering. Ethan could have still grown up to be a man of faith because he experienced Egypt. He experienced the exodus. He experienced the crossing. He experienced both of the two first passovers and Ethan would have come out of Egypt still circumcised. Right and they said, we're going to follow Joshua and do whatever he said. So there was this massive amount of renewal and revival that happened but just because the entire, just because the generation was faithless doesn't mean every single individual was. They're clearly going to be children raised in the right house who were trained the right way, who also graduated out of Egypt and still moved into Canaan. It was basically everybody from Yusuf's age up, right? So that's me and then Jim, Justin, you'd be in that generation. We're gonna, all of us, anybody born with a 19 in the beginning of your birthday, we all lost it on the wilderness road for sure. But does that make sense? Like there was a massive amount of renewal. Mel, is there another question? All right, standing by for question three. That's okay. All right, here we go. Next question. What happened to the generation that God said would not enter his promised land due to their disobedience? If disobedience is not pulling, putting full trust in God, do you think they will be in heaven? Oh yes, I love this question because it allows me to talk about something that's very important. There is a difference between earthly consequences and eternal consequences for sin. So let me lay it up. You're talking about a generation who did not trust God to enter the promised land. You're then, the questioner seems to be assuming that if they lived the entire generation of the wilderness wandering in disobedience that they wouldn't be saved. And that does sound good. However, the wilderness wandering is the consequence for one specific act of disobedience. If you read the book of numbers, there are plenty of times that God gave them reasons to come back and trust me, come back and trust me, come back and trust me. In fact, one of the most famous examples, Jesus repeats in his conversation in John three, when he's talking to Nicodemus and he says, just as Moses raised up the bronze serpent in the wilderness, God was tired of his people complaining. And so he sent an entire plague of poisonous snakes. I mean, God don't play, man. Like you're used to this like comfy God, God's like, let's hit him with snakes. Right? So God sends this plague of snakes. But before the snake showed up, Moses made a bronze pole that if they looked at that bronze pole and they trusted that God would save them, that he did. So even in the wilderness wandering, there are moments where we see real faith coming out of God's people. The wilderness wandering in total is the consequence of their total act of disobedience at Sinai. You can be living in the consequences of disobedience and still come to God and still have genuine faith. So just because this first act of disobedience led them on 40 years worth of wandering doesn't mean there still could not be genuine salvific faith that took place during that time because God was giving them all kinds of reasons to come back and trust, come back and trust. Ethan would have survived that one too. He's a good kid. He would have trusted God. You got anything else, Mel? Oh, yeah. Since it was Jesus who appeared not an angel, is that why he didn't start with do not be afraid like all the other times people? I think that's a great observation. I mean, the quick answer would be yes. Although when Jesus chooses to, there are several theophany's throughout the Old Testament. Maybe that would be a fun series. We just look at when God shows up in the Old Testament. Jesus did not appear in a form that caused fear. That is probably more the genuine reason for the whole do not be afraid thing. But I think it's very interesting. You're right. There is no do not be afraid. Jesus just standing there like, you know, soared out, ready to throw down. And Joshua's like, yo, what's up? You with me? And he's like, nah, are you with me? You know, I think Jesus showed up in this moment to confirm to the leader of his covenant people that they are about to receive the covenant inheritance. And also, remember, Joshua was about to lead a military campaign, knowing that the son of God is the commander of an entire angelic army that is going to go before me. That would give me a lot of confidence to trust God and to lead his people into trusting him. So, yes, I think it's an interesting coincidence, but no, I don't think it's necessary that do not be afraid. I think that also adds to the argument for why it's a theophany and not an angelic visitation. All right. I have little dots that say Melanie's going to give me another question. There we go. If God's are, quote, regional, are demons regional? Okay. Interesting question. My comment on henotheism was not to establish that pagan gods are in fact regional. It was to establish that that is how ancient people viewed gods as regional. If you want my opinion, I think all gods that are not the real God are distractions and demonic. So therefore, yes, one could argue the God of Delaware could be a demon. The God of Georgia could be a demon. The God of California is most definitely a demon. The God of Nevada could be a demon. Right? Just saying. Although it's been so hot lately, maybe the God of Delaware needs to take a break. I wasn't meaning to say the gods are in fact regional. I was meaning to say that they thought the people of that day viewed gods as regional authorities. What is very interesting is if they are in fact demonic, the Bible does give credence to the fact that there are demons who have authority over certain areas. The New Testament calls them principalities, powers, princes of a specific area. So that does tie together and could be part of it. But no, I wasn't trying to say gods are regional. I was trying to say that the people of that day viewed gods as regional. And I have another speech bubble. That means we have some good questions today. Is it possible that any of the books of the Bible were written by women? Yes, it's absolutely possible. And here's why. There are 66 books of scripture. We know 40 or fairly certain we know 40 of them. The other 26 are very debated, very debatable. Is it possible that there is one of those 26 outstanding books that was written by a woman? It is possible. Can I tell you with all full certainty that I know for certain that a woman has written any of the 66 books of scripture? I cannot. I can't tell you with certainty. All I can tell you is yes, if we know that there's about 40, 40 plus books that we're fairly certain we know who wrote them. And then there are some that are debated. I would say if you would like to make now the question is, and I'm trying to like think through the 26 that we don't know while I'm talking and I cannot think of one right now from the cuff in which a female author is one of the heavy favorites, but I'm going off of like ADHD brain time at this point. So that's not a researched answer. But yes, if you're asking for plausibility, yes, it's totally plausible that one of the unknown books was actually penned by a woman. But since it's in an unknown category, you can't make an argument from silence. I can't tell you that it was in fact, I can just tell you that I don't know the author of some of the books of scripture confidently. And so if you wanted, I guess to the questioner, I would say it this way. If you're looking to try to see if a woman wrote any of the books of scripture, what you need to do is you need to look at each book. You need to look at what scholars say the most likely candidates are and then make your case. Can you build a case that, let's say Phoebe for instance, Phoebe is a very important New Testament female character. Can you make a case that Phoebe actually wrote one of the books of the New Testament? I don't know. That's a activity that I have never tried to tilt at. But I can say that no, I can't rule it out because, Barry, that would be making an argument from silence. And that's not a very smart research thing to do. But I don't, I can't give it to you off the top of my head. Mel, anything else? All right. Thank you. Thank you for asking tough questions. Thank you for thinking deeply and being willing to. Thank you for being willing to question me. And if there's nothing else you learned from church, never trust what the pastor says. Always question it. Always look for yourself. Always be ready to challenge. Because, Gary, I can be wrong. I am only a human being. Human beings are fallible. I have tried my best to study and read widely and bring you as much information as possible. But you should always question your pastor and don't ever take, because I'm the pastor, as an acceptable answer. If there's one thing you learned from Dr. Bill, trust that. Never trust the pastor.
