# Transcript: Joshua   Ch6   Reception As Judgment
Date: 2026-07-20

---

Welcome to Catalyst, I'm Dr. Bill. I am privileged to be the pastor and the primary teacher here at Catalyst Community Church. For all of you who are here in the Wilmington campus, good morning, and for everyone who is joining us online on our live stream, whether you're watching it now or you're watching a replay after the fact, thank you for taking the time to be a part of our service. Before I get into my introduction and my sermon, you will notice that there is a small collection of backpacks that are here on the stage in front of me, and that is because we are getting ready for back to school season. And as a church, we sponsor our local elementary school, Richardson Park, and we will be prepping 130 backpacks with school supplies for them. This is just the backpacks that we still had leftover from last year. We have 100 more coming. They will fill the stage all the way around. They are $20 a backpack, and we're going to start raising the funds for that. And next month, we will pack them. We have one of our small groups at Meesewood Sunday morning that they will, well, Lisa will make sure Jim does a good job and we get the bags packed, and then we'll actually go there at the open house and give them to the children. So that's what my new decorations are. They'll be here next week. Hopefully you'll see a whole lot more of them. As a way of introduction, has anybody ever come to church or come to serve at a church and not feel adequate for the job? Anybody ever try to do something? Mr. Steve, you got your hand way up there real fast. So I just want to open the air by saying today, I feel very inadequate. I don't feel good about my job, and I don't feel up to the task. Not because I don't want to be your servant, but because today we got to really dive. We got to really dive and wrestle with scripture at a level that most people will never do on a sunny morning. So I'd rather open with a little bit of humility and let you know I'm going to give you my absolute best. But if my best falls short today, ask me a question and let's get into it, okay? So here we go. You saw in the introduction, we're continuing in the book of Joshua. The key thought for this morning is the key thought for all of these sermons. God's promises never expire. They walk, or excuse me, they are received by walking in faithful obedience. If you have the Catalyst app, it's going to be the easiest way to follow along and participate in a service today. If you open the Catalyst app and scroll down, you'll see a blue box with a little white notebook and a black pen that says sermon notes. If you open that up, you will have all of my sermon notes. The sermon notes in the app is also where the ask a question button lies. So if you're new to Catalyst, whether you're here in the building or you're joining us online, I take Q&A every Sunday. You are free to ask any question that you like. Do not believe me, do not take it for granted. Any question is okay, but rather than raise hands and interrupt the flow of the sermon, we take the questions digitally. They'll come to my wife's phone right here on the front row. And then when I bring the sermon in for a close, we'll look at the clock, estimate time, and then she will start feeding me questions that you come up with during the service today. So please feel comfortable asking those questions. The button is in the app in the sermon notes. The title of my message this morning is called Reception as Judgment, Reception as Judgment. And the text that we are gonna read is Joshua chapter six. We've been walking through the book of Joshua one chapter at a time, and we have now reached chapter six. The message focused that I want to try to lead through is that God's inheritance is received through faithful obedience. It is not claimed or won by human effort. That true inheritance from God comes from faith, not human effort. So first, let's read Joshua six. So if you brought your Bibles, you can turn or tap with me to Joshua chapter six. If you have the Catalyst app, there's a Bible button at the bottom of it. Our tech team is also gonna have all of the verses on the screen for you. I wanna read all of Joshua chapter six, and then go back through and walk through it verse by verse. So here we go, Joshua chapter six starting in verse one. Now the gates of Jericho were securely barred because of the Israelites. No one went out and no one came in. Then the Lord said to Joshua, see, I have delivered Jericho into your hands along with its king and its fighting men. March around the city once with all the armed men. Do this for six days. Have the priests carry trumpets of ram's horns in front of the ark. On the seventh day, march around the city seven times with the priests blowing trumpets. When you hear them, sound a long blast on the trumpets. Have the whole army give a loud shout. Then the wall of the city will collapse. The army will go up. Everyone, straight in. Verse six. So Joshua son of Nun called the priests and said to them, take up the ark of the covenant of the Lord and have seven priests carry trumpets in front of it. And he ordered the army, advance. March around the city with an armed guard going ahead of the ark of the Lord. When Joshua spoke to the people, seven priests carrying separate trumpets before the Lord went forward blowing their trumpets and the ark of the Lord's covenant followed them. The armed guard marched ahead of the priests who blew the trumpets and the rear guard followed the ark. All this time, the trumpets were sounding. Verse 10. But Joshua had commanded the army, do not give a war cry. Do not raise your voices. Do not say a word until the day I tell you to shout. Then shout. So he had the ark of the Lord carried around the city, circling it once. Then the army returned to camp and spent the night there. Joshua got up early the next morning and the priests took up the ark of the Lord. Seven priests carrying seven trumpets went forward, marching before the ark of the Lord and blowing the trumpets. The armed men went ahead of them and the rear guard followed the ark of the Lord while the trumpets kept sounding. On the second day, they marched around the city once and returned to camp. They did this for six days. Verse 15. On the seventh day, they got up at daybreak and marched around the city seven times in the same manner, except that on that day, they circled the city seven times. The seventh time around, when the priest sounded the trumpet blast, Joshua commanded the army, shout for the Lord has given you the city. Verse 17. The city and all that is in it are to be devoted to the Lord. Only Rahab, the prostitute, and all who are with her in her house shall be spared because she hid the spies we sent. But keep away from the devoted things so that you will not bring about your own destruction by taking any of them. Otherwise, you will make the camp of Israel liable to destruction and bring trouble on it. 19. All the silver and gold, the articles of bronze and iron are sacred to the Lord and must go into his treasury. When the trumpet sounded, the army shouted, and at the sound of the trumpet, when the men gave a loud shout, the wall collapsed. So everyone charged straight in and they took the city. They devoted the city to the Lord and destroyed with the sword every living thing in it, men and women, young and old, cattle, sheep, and donkeys. That gets us all the way to 21. 22. Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land, go into the prostitute's house and bring her out and all who belong to her in accordance with your oath to her. So the young men who had done the spying went in and brought out Rahab, her father, her mother, her brothers, her sisters, and all who belonged to her. They brought out her entire family and put them in a place outside the camp of Israel. Then they burned the whole city and everything in it. But they put the silver and gold and articles of bronze and iron into the treasury of the Lord's house. 25. But Joshua spared Rahab the prostitute with her family and all who belong to her because she hid the men Joshua sent as spies to Jericho and she lives among the Israelites to this day. At that time, Joshua pronounced a solemn oath. Cursed before the Lord is the one who undertakes to rebuild this city, Jericho. At the cost of his firstborn, he will lay its foundations. At the cost of his youngest, he will set up its gates. 27. So the Lord was with Joshua and his fame set spread throughout the land. I realize it's 27 verses, but as you notice, it like repeats itself a lot, right? It's like, it's an ancient Near Eastern story. And so they keep reviewing details like building Lego bricks as the story goes along. So let's rewind back to the very beginning, verse one, and let's sort of chop this up. The first point, if you're following along in the notes, letter A is the inheritance is ready. Before I even preach another verse from this chapter, remember, Israel is not taking the land of Canaan. God is giving the land of Canaan. That one thing changes everything about the book. If you read the book of Joshua as merely the strongest guy wins, then you view it as military conquest. That is not the correct frame for the book of Joshua. Go all the way back to Genesis chapter 12. God promised Abraham, I will be your God, you will be my people, what? And I will give this land to your descendants as a forever inheritance. He tells them, look to the north, to the south, to the east, to the west, from here, to here, from there, over there. God is super clear 470 years into the past that this land would be an inheritance. It's now in Joshua where we see that reception happening, but don't disconnect the reception from the commitment, which happened centuries ago. So letter A in my notes is the inheritance is ready. Notice that we're at chapter six. John, we're at six. That means there's five whole chapters where God was preparing his people for the land before he actually gave the land to his people. So five chapters have gone by, and now in chapter six, verse one, the inheritance is ready to be received by Israel. And we get to verse one. The gates of Jericho were securely barred because of the Israelites. Stop. We've already been given a preview of what the inside of the city of Jericho looks like. We have it in Rahab's testimony about God in chapter two. She says, we know that you're, or she said, I know that your God is the God of heaven above and the earth below. We've heard about what he did in Egypt. We heard about what he did on the other side of the Jordan to the Amorite kings. We've heard these things, and our hearts are melting in fear. So we know what was going on inside the city. They knew that God was giving the land to Israel, but you have to remember that in this particular time, in the land, I would say this is probably the late Bronze Age, the walled city was considered basically impenetrable. It was considered absolutely safe. If we wall ourselves off in the city, Jen, as long as we have like a water supply and somewhere to still get our hair did, and something like that, we can live inside the city and we can be safe and we can be happy. So the fact that they have securely barred all the walls, and look, no one went out and no one came in. This is Jericho in hyper defense mode. And the strategy here is I can last longer inside my walls than you can last outside my walls. That's the basic sort of, what do they call that strategy? Siege, siege warfare. That's the basic siege strategy is I can last, I can outlast longer than you. No one went out and no one came in. Verse two, then the Lord said to Joshua, see I have delivered Jericho into your hands along with its king and his fighting men. At this point in Joshua 6.2, that has to sound like a ludicrous statement. Jim, this is one of the most well defended, well fortified siege ready cities in the entire land of Canaan. And now they're all walled up, they're all boarded up, they're all geared up, they got spare mags on their chest pouches, they're ready to roll. And now God's gonna say, yeah, by the way, I'm gonna give you the entire city. Also notice in verse two, the conjugation of the verb, I have delivered Jericho, God is speaking in the past tense. He didn't say I am delivering and he didn't say I will deliver. He said I have delivered. From God's perspective, the delivery of Jericho is a done deal. Sorry, online people, the whole point was to turn the microphone off so you didn't have to hear me sneeze. So in verse two, God says I have delivered. God is intentionally speaking in the past tense, describing an action that has already been completed in his perspective that we are witnessing in our perspective. The words in your hands literally means to give, to hand over, to surrender, to lay down, to put in front of, which gets me to letter B. Inheritance is received by faith, not force. The inheritance is received by faith, not by force. Verse three, march around the city once with all the armed men, do this for six days. Just put yourself in an ancient, near Eastern siege warfare mentality. Steve, we were coming up against one of the most well-fortified cities in the area and our battle strategy is to take a walk. We didn't bring any siege weapons. We're not trying to bring ladders. We're not trying to climb. We don't have archers ready to take anybody off the parapet. No, we're just walking. Not only are we walking, we brought a soundtrack. We brought trumpet players, y'all. We're gonna jazzercise our way around the city of Jericho. And I say that because I want you to laugh at it and I want you to see how absurd it must have felt to the Israelites. I'm just gonna say this half, if you guys are Jericho, John, you and Ray, you're at the top, bows ready. You could fire down and kill us at any moment. We're not bringing shields. You're looking down and we're just. Had to look silly from your perspective. Steve, you and I are jazzercise and that's already really silly. I need you to see the tension thematically that when God tells his people, go walk around the city, you don't think there was at least one Israelite? I mean, Jim, definitely. So Jim was there, he'd be like, man, this is silly. I don't know why Jim just picked up a southern accent, but we're just gonna pretend. The command to march around the city was faith on Israel's part. They are in danger because their enemies are above them. Their enemies could throw things down at them. Their enemies could fire bows and arrows down at them. Their enemies could light fire down upon them. When God said, go march around the city, it wasn't just a leisurely musical stroll. We are marching through enemy territory around an enemy who is guarded, who is armed, who is ready to defend and propel borders, and Jim were jamming. That in and of itself was a major act of faith on Israel's part to say, if God has said he is giving us the city, we will do what God says, even when it don't make no good sense. Sreede, that's a theological term, don't make no good sense. Not only does he ask him to do it once, but verse three, do this for six days. For six days. Steve is gonna lead us in jazzers thighs. Then we get to verse four. Seven priests carrying seven trumpets in front of the ark. Whose presence is leading Israel while they march around the city? God. Whose presence led Israel crossing the Jordan? God. Whose presence did they recommit themselves to at Gilgal when they recommitted to circumcision that wasn't done during the wilderness wandering? God. They are following God, doing something that feels incredibly silly in the correct setting to trust in God's power, not in their own. Verse five. When you hear the sound of the trumpet blast, have the whole army give a loud shout. John, again, you're up on the city wall. This has gotta be hilarious. They're just gonna yell at our stone walls. Go ahead, you can yell to your blue-in-the-face. You can hit your head, hit your face on the wall a few times, Israelites. This is our city. We've defended it for decades. You're not getting in. And yelling, I mean, anybody ever heard the phrase, feels like I'm just banging my head against a brick wall. How about yell at a brick wall? That ever worked for anybody ever? Again, logically, what God is asking them to do is trust in his directions and not in their power and in their might and in their strength. They could not part the waters of the Red Sea, but God did. They could not stop and cause the Jordan River to stack. And by the way, I realized in a previous week, I called it a 12-foot high apartment building. I apologize, it's 12 stories, right? 12-foot high apartment building would be very difficult to live in. Someone was nice enough to point that out to me after church, I was like, man, that sounds so stupid. So God parted the Red Sea, God parted the Jordan River. They're asking Israel to trust him again and just yell at the wall. And God is going to cause it to collapse. God tells them ahead of time exactly what miraculous thing he will do if they trust him. He told them up front, Claude, let's walk around, let's do it. And then when you shout, by the way, at the trumpet blast, which was worship, by the way, let's get into that, right? God's presence and worship led the miracle that happened in their reception, verse six. So Joshua, son of Nun, called the priests and told the priests to lead them. I think it's interesting that leadership is done by those who are designated to lead the people to follow God, not lead the people to follow themselves. He didn't say, generals go lead, soldiers go lead, mounted horsemen go lead. He said, now, send the priests. Why? Because what's the priest's job? To lead the people to follow God, not follow strength. Right? One person want to give me an mm on that. That was one of the best points of the sermon, right there. So he ordered the army march and they march around the city. You get down to verse eight, the seven priests carrying the sempits, they go before them and the arc of the covenant, follow them and then in verse nine, you also see that they had an armed guard guarding the arc, not a special forces unit ready for incursion. The armed guards that surrounded the arc were to protect the arc, not to attack Jericho. The arc is what was going to bring the wall down, not the incursion of soldiers. And then verse 10, I love this. Don't give a war cry. Don't raise your voice. Don't say a word. So Steve, not only are we choreographing our way all the way around Jerusalem, but we're doing so completely quiet, right? What does, I'm sorry, the ADHD in my mind is watching everybody. I'm telling you, this had to look so absurd to the Canaanites who are looking down from the top of the walls and from the Israelites who are marching around to the sound of their trumpet blast, making no verbal noise whatsoever. If you miss the absurdity of what God asks them to do, if you miss the power of the miracle that it brought about. Verse, I didn't do that, we did 10. So you get to verse 11. So the Ark of the Lord carried around the city, circling at once, then the army returned to camp. And then basically 12, 13, it reminds us what's happening. 14, they did this for six days. Now he collapses six days worth of absurdity into the end of verse 14. Then, just keep in mind, that's the test for Israel. It wasn't just, will you do this silly thing one time and trust me, and then I'll give you, no, no, no. I need you to give an entire week. Give me an entire week of doing silly, to tell me that you trust me more than you trust you. That you trust my power to give you the city more than your ability to come up with a way to invade it. So on the seventh day, they got up at daybreak, right? That's early. Somebody woke up, the rest of the teenagers, I'm sure, marched around the city seven times in the same manner, except that on that day, they encircled the city seven times. The seventh time around, here's 16, when the priest sounded the trumpet blast, Joshua commanded the army, shout for the Lord has given you the city. For six days, they're quietly going around the city, and then on the seventh day, they do it seven times, and then they yell. They verbally yell in response to the priest's signal, and it is their voice that's the only thing that they humanly did. I don't think this is accidental. I think this is God being so intentional, but if you moved past the absurdity too quickly, you would miss it. I don't care how many people you have stand outside this building and yell, I don't believe the bricks are coming down from the building we're sitting in, right? So God chose an action that he could command his people to do to show their obedience that actually had no effect on the wall whatsoever. What did it have effect on? Illustrating their faith in his leadership by saying shout, shout, by the way, shout, when the priest tell you to, so there's directed obedience. Let's be honest, the shouting did not bring the wall down. God did. The shouting illustrated that his people were willing to obey him when it didn't make sense in the natural to see God move in the supernatural. So they shout, which is something that every human being knows would not be responsible for tearing down stone walls. How many times in our lives do we try to force an outcome physically that God has already said he's gonna give us, but we try to usurp his timing and get it when we want it? The shout is the only action that people did. It was God who delivered the city when he was ready to, right? John, maybe you were just, now I'm gonna put you on the other side of the equation. Maybe you were ready to take the city on day three. You were like, man, I'm feeling froggy. I had that good hummus this morning for breakfast. I'm ready to go. God's like, no, you will receive my inheritance when I am ready to give it to you. And there's nothing you can do to speed up the process. The only thing you can do is be obedient. And it was the obedience that delivered it. The letter C, if you're following along, the inheritance is held in stewardship, not ownership. Remember back to Genesis chapter 12, the inheritance is an everlasting inheritance generationally, which means they are stewards of it, not owners of it. 17, the city and all that's in it are devoted to the Lord. Stop. I need to teach you a new word this morning for you to understand the rest of what's about to happen here. The word devoted to the Lord in this verse can literally be translated under the ban, under the ban. The Hebrew term for this is harem, H-Flem-E-R-E-M, harem. Harem is kind of the opposite of holy. So what is the definition of holy? To be set apart, right? Generally speaking, when we say that, we mean set apart for God's use, right? Whether we, as his people, are holy, set apart for his minishin, whether the items in the Old Testament temple in Tabernacle are set aside for his use, holy is set aside for his use. Harem is set aside for his judgment. That's what harem means. So when God says that the entire city is to be given to me as an offering, it's to be devoted to me, it's holy and harem are two opposites. Holy is dedicated to God for usage, harem is dedicated to God for judgment. But he's saying both belong to me. So when we read here, the city and all that are in it are under the ban, they are harem, they are to be devoted to the Lord, notice all capital letters, devoted to the covenant God of Israel. Only Rahab the prostitute and all who are with her in her house shall be spared, stop. So that's two sentences and they are not in conflict with one another. I need to point that out because there's some who would want to attack us and say, look, your Bible has a contradiction. God said everybody, but then, oh yeah, not. No, he said, here is what it is. This entire city is to be given to me as an offering for destruction. But this family is to be saved. Now we dealt with Rahab's salvation in chapter two, you saw it again in chapter four, right? So that's what the harem means. It means to be devoted to God for destruction. And even in the midst of that, I love Rahab. This is, anybody asks you, where is God's grace in the Old Testament? This is salvation from death because of faith right here. The entire city is to be devoted to destruction, but because of Rahab's faith, her entire family is saved. And we'll get into the corporate aspect of that in a minute. Verse 18, don't disconnect 17 from 18, but keep away from the devoted things. So now it's don't, so give me the whole city. By the way, John, keep away from the things that are in the city, why? So you do not bring destruction, bring about your own destruction by taking any of them. Otherwise, you will make the camp of Israel liable to destruction and you will bring trouble on it. God says that is mine, don't take what is mine. That's what he's saying. Israel, you are not allowed to have the under demand or the harem things either. And should you choose to do this, you will bring destruction upon your own people. 19, all the silver, gold, articles of bronze and iron, they are sacred to the Lord and they must go into his treasury. Here's holy, not harem. Harem, devoted to God for destruction, holy, devoted to God for his usage. He tells them to take all the metal things, the bronze, the iron, the silver, the gold, they will go into the Lord's treasury, that's holy. The rest of the city is harem. Verse 20, when the trumpet sound, the army shouted and at the sound of the trumpet, everybody gave a shout, the wall collapsed and everybody charged in. 20 undersells the miracle of the moment. Really, really does. After all the crazy and the funny and the jazzercise and everything else, verse 20 just underplays God's people obeyed him and experienced a miracle. The people who are living inside the city, other than those who are in Rahab's house, see, Rahab's house, they're in the midst of judgment but they have salvation from it and they know it. She's been promised it. She hasn't experienced it yet, right? She's still living inside the city and everybody in the city's terrified. And maybe there was one or two of her family members that were looking at her like, you sure this is gonna go down this way? I mean, like for real? And then all of a sudden, out of nowhere, the number one infrastructure thing that they trust in, which is their walls, comes crumbling down at the power of the God of Israel. They had to be shaking in their boots. And then all of a sudden, here comes those two spies to save her. I do wanna point out, let's see, verse 20, verse 21, they devoted the city to the Lord and destroyed with the sword every living thing in it, men, women, young, old, cattle, sheep, and donkeys. Again, devoted, there's that concept of harem. I need to point out a few things and then we're gonna deal with the tough question of the day. So 21, the devoted, that's the harem. Lord, capital letters, that's the covenant God of Israel. They destroyed every living thing. Stop. This is literal, but not literal, and here's what I mean. If we say they destroyed every living thing in it, but we know that Rahab and her family are saved because of faith, and they're in the city, do you see how people could say that our Bible has a conflict there? Well, is it every living thing or is it every living thing minus Rahab? Because every living thing would have to include Rahab and her family, but the Bible says that Rahab and her family got saved. So how do I deal with this contradiction? It's because not everything that's literal is literal, and here's what I mean. I know that I'm not a sports ball guy, but I know there's a lot of you who are big sports fans. Has anybody ever heard somebody say, oh man, they got totally annihilated? Man, that team totally annihilated the other team. Does that mean that they actually murdered them and burned their bodies to dust and they don't ever exist? No, it's inflated language to illustrate a point. That is exactly if you look up other ancient war recordings and ancient war records from this time, that's the kind of language they used. They killed every living thing. Now, the truth is God said, give me the entire city, devote it to me for judgment, but guess what? Because of that one woman's faith, she is spared from judgment. God's not changing the rule. He made the rule and he offered this salvation exception from within the rule. That is no different from us in the New Testament saying, all human beings are born sinful and we have to face judgment, but Jesus died to offer salvation and anybody who takes it freely will be given it. This is the gospel on display hundreds and thousands of years before Jesus ever showed up. So the every living thing is not a contradiction in scripture. This is rhetorical language, just like using the term totally annihilated at a sports game. It is literal, but the language has a meaning in the way it's used. Everything in the city is devoted to God. Rahab and her family are devoted for holy and everything else is devoted for harem. That's still everything in the city. And Rahab and her family weren't killed. Another example of how everything can be literal, but not literal. Does anybody start their day, punch the ground jogging? How about hit the ground running? Exactly, you see the difference? Everybody, several of you looked at me like, did that fat man just say what I think he said? Right, nobody says I'm gonna start my day, punch the ground jogging. And yet punch means hit, jogging means running. No, when we hit the ground running, that collection of words means something that synonyms for those words do not mean. That's literal, but not literal. Literal, but linguistic. You have to understand the language. Now, before anybody starts typing the question, or if you already have, here you go. Here's the tough question for today. Does this mean God commanded genocide? Is one of the largest accusations to be made at the Christian scriptures. This is one of its major scenes, and we don't dodge. If you're new to Catalyst, we don't dodge tough questions. We take them head on. Does this mean God commanded genocide? Here you go. Number one, let's define the word genocide so we know what we're talking about. Always important when somebody asks you a question, if the term could be taken more than one way, always get the correct definition. Here is the definition according to the United Nations Charter on genocide. Genocide is the intentional extermination of all or part of a people group because of who they are. The intentional extermination of all or a part of a people group because of who they are. In war, let's say just in World War I, lots of French people died. Does that mean World War I was a genocide against the French? No, because the French soldiers who gave their lives in World War I did not give their lives because they were targeted for being Frenchmen or French women, right? That's not genocide because it's not the intentional extermination of all or part of a people group because of who they are. Fast forward to World War II and the extermination of the Jews. Is that genocide? Yes, why? Because the Jews were targeted because of who they were. They weren't enemy combatants, they weren't soldiers on a battlefield. They were targeted because of who they were, not what they do. Frenchmen in World War I died because of what they did. Jews in World War II died because of who they are. Two very different things. So in order for this to be genocide, we would have to qualify that all the people who died are the intentional extermination of all or a people group because of who they are. So now how do I, as the Christian apologist, answer this question? Here you go. Fact number one. Now this is a biblical fact. If you do not believe in God or you do not believe the gospel, you're not gonna accept this fact, that's cool, but it is a biblical fact. God is the judge of all human sin because all human sin is ultimately against God, not always against us. When we sin against a human being, we sin against an image bearer, but all sin is a violation of God's love. So all sin is against God and therefore he is the judge of all sin. Fact number two. God has been patient for centuries with the Canaanites. Those of you who like your notes, this is Genesis chapter 15 verse 16, and I believe most of all these points are also in the digital sermon notes in your app. God has been patient for centuries. If you go to Genesis chapter 15 verse 16, you will see God's conversation with Abraham where he tells him, I am going to give this land to your descendants, but the sin of the Canaanites has not reached its full measure and so they cannot be driven out of the land, so you have to wait. God knew, and I actually, I asked an AI engine to calculate the amount of approximate years between Genesis 15 and Joshua 6. It comes out to be about 470. It could be as low as 450, it might be as high as 490, but we're just gonna go with 470 as like a middle of the road number. So for 470 years, God has been patient with the sin of the Canaanites before acting. Point number three, God gave Canaan decades of warnings through his mighty acts, not silence, and then judgment. Exodus 23, 27, and 28, I will send a hornet ahead of you to drive them out. Deuteronomy 720 says the same thing again. I will send hornets ahead of you to drive them out. Joshua chapter two verses nine through 11, that's Rahab. She says, we know, we've heard of all the things that God has done, we know he has given you this land. Fact number three, and here's the big one. Judgment is tied to conduct. The judgment was tied to specific conduct, including child sacrifice, not ethnic identity. So this is not Israelites killing Canaanites. This is Israelites being used by God to judge the sin of the Canaanites. What is the sin of the Canaanites? Deuteronomy chapter 12, 29 through 31, they were burning their children alive on altars to worship their God. God cannot allow that to stand. He told Abram 470 years ago, their sin has not reached its measure to be judged yet. You people will have to wait. They will go into Egypt and they will be slaves, and then I will come and get them when it's time to bring them. But the sin of these people has not reached the point where they're not allowed to live in the land anymore. This is a very Old Testament theological concept that we don't imagine today, but does God own all the earth? I'm sorry, just for clarification, does God own all the earth? Yes, he does. Does God have the right to give land that he owns to any person that he chooses? Does God also have the right, if you do not obey him, to not have the land that he gave you anymore? Yes. So God has been patient with them. They have known his mighty acts, and judgment is now about specific child sacrifice. So God has given them the right to give land that he has given them. And if you don't have the right to give them, you can go to Leviticus chapter 18, 24 to 28. That's why it's all in your notes so you don't have to write it all down. God tells Israel, bro, if you can, this is my, I'm sorry, you didn't say that way. This is my interpretation of what God said. Bro, if you do what they did, I'm gonna throw you out, just like I threw them out. That's Leviticus chapter 18, 24 to 28. Don't do what they did or you too will be judged. So this is not judgment based on a people group based on the actions that can no longer be tolerated by God. Fact number five, individuals who changed allegiance regardless of ethnicity were spared and grafted in. That's Rahab from chapter two and the entire tribe of the Gibeonites from Joshua chapter nine. We haven't made it there yet, but that's another example. When they chose allegiance to God, salvation is given. And they were spared from judgment. That illustrates again that we are talking about loyalty and action, not bloodline. Fact number six, the wider Canaanite population is never destroyed. Canaanites remained throughout the land for generations after Jericho. Why else do you think God had to keep saying, stop doing what the Canaanites do? If this moment right here in Joshua six is truly genocide, then John, they shouldn't be there in Joshua nine. They shouldn't be there during the judges period, during the king's period. They shouldn't be there at all. If it's genocide, then call it what it is. If it's not, then let's be honest. It is not the intentional extermination of all or in part of a people group because of who they are. This is judgment on sin that God could no longer tolerate. So no, this is not genocide. It is the judgment on sin. Now, where else in the Bible could I look and see God bringing judgment on sin before the end of days? Sodom and Gomorrah. That's another instance where God saw the sin of an area and said, I can no longer sit idly by and allow this to get that bad. What's the difference between Sodom and Gomorrah and Joshua chapter six? In Sodom and Gomorrah, God sent his judgment direct. This was like a direct text message from God to Sodom. Boom. In this instance, God uses human agents, the nation of Israel, to bring about his judgment. But God is still the righteous judge of sin. He has the right to judge sin. He has the right to stop people from burning their children alive. He has the right to do that. What's uncomfortable for us is not the right that God, well, hopefully what's uncomfortable is not that God has the right to judge sin. If you are uncomfortable with the fact that God has the right to judge sin, you have a sin understanding problem, not a judgment problem. What's uncomfortable in Joshua chapter six is that God is using Israel to judge the sin of the Canaanites. But as the direct answer, is this genocide? No, it's not. It's not genocide because they're not being killed because of who they are. They're being judged for what they do. It's not genocide because every single city in the land of Canaan was not put under the ban. There's actually only three cities. And here's what's interesting about the three cities. One is in southern, one is in central, and one is in northern. These are devoted to God for harem as the exemplar for the entire area. Keep in mind, Rahab and all the Gideonites are saved when they changed allegiance. What I know about God's character is he would have loved it if all the people in the entire city of Jericho said, okay, we worship God, stop. God would have desired that, guess what? They didn't do that. And here's the rub with God's sovereignty and man's free will, which I don't have the time to unpack today. God would have loved it if everyone in the city would have chosen him, but they didn't. And what's super uncomfortable for us is there does come a time when judgment is due. And patience ends and judgment begins. That's not unloving. Here's another just bonus point. You cannot take one piece of God's character and illuminate it or zoom it to be above all the others. God is loving, God is merciful, God is righteous, and God is just. He's all of these things. You can't say that God's love overtakes his mercy, overtakes his righteousness, or overtakes his judgment, and nor can you say that God's judgment overtakes his love or his mercy or his righteousness. He's all of them to the extreme. So don't zoom one piece of God's character out, all of all the others. So is it genocide? No, for all those reasons. That was the warmup. Here's the hard question. Were there any children in the city at this time? Does the Bible specifically say no, but in verse 21, that's the sound my brain makes when I search the page. They devoted the city to the Lord and destroyed with a sword every living thing in it, men and women, young and old. So if verse 21 means exactly the way it reads, then that means the children who are alive in the city of Jericho at this time were also devoted to the Lord's judgment and destruction. So now here's the real hard question. How do I square my understanding of God's character with the fact that this, and I can't say does, but I will say likely, plausibly includes Canaanite children who are sitting inside, and again, not all Canaanite children, right? Because all of Rahab's family were saved, so only some. Guilt and faith are both corporate before their individual. And here's something we don't understand in our Western mentality, because we're all, or most of us are American Westerners. At this time and in this area, the unit is more valuable than the individual. And what I mean by that is the family is more valuable than the person, the city or the area is more valuable than any one family. In our culture today, we turn that up, we have individualist society. Each individual is more important than the family that they come from. But in this time period, in this age, the group is more important than the individual. We still have vestiges of this in different areas of the world today. I was just having a conversation with my son-in-law about Middle Eastern views of family versus individuals. The Middle East is a place where you can clearly see this corporate family mentality, the family's more important than the individual. Also, let's go over to East Asia. In many Asian cultures, especially when you get into ancestor worship and some other stuff there, in Asian cultures, the family is more important than the individual. So how do I get this? So here it is first, guilt and faith are both corporate before their individual. Rahab's whole household is saved because of her faith and Aiken, who we're gonna look at next week, but spoiler alert, so here's what's cool. Rahab is a Canaanite who is saved, she's holy because of her faith. Aiken is an Israelite who ends up becoming harem because of his disobedience. So you got a Canaanite who's saved because of faith and you got an Israelite who's judged because of disobedience. That's about action and sin, not about ethnic identity. So Rahab's whole household is saved because of her faith and my sermon for next week, Aiken's whole household bears the weight of his sin. Neither is about the individual member, both are about how deeply one person's allegiance binds a family to the nation around them. So I am not going to mince words with you, I absolutely believe that there were young people alive in the city of Jericho when this incursion happened and I absolutely believe the text describes the extermination of those people, I do. I'm not gonna back down from it, I'm not gonna pretend and try to give you a false explanation to pretend like it's only, like some people have tried to claim it was just a military outpost, it was just a military outpost, they were all just soldiers, there's likely no women, there's likely no children. Really, why is Rahab and her mother and her father and her children there? Now keep in mind, what Rahab does for a living, I used to live outside of a military base, so there are definitely some like Sketchville types of employment opportunities just outside of a military base, right? Those who were in the armed services, you're all laughing right now because you know exactly what I'm saying. I absolutely believe there were young people in the city of Jericho at this time. It breaks my heart that those young people were judged because of the sin of their entire area. Here's why I still don't believe that God is unloving or unjust for doing so. Not every city in Canaan is judged at this level. There's three, one in the south, one in the central, and one in the north. And God judges the sin of one city as an example to call the rest of the area to salvation. And even within the judgment of just Jericho, there's salvation for this house. We don't know that Rahab's mother and father claimed allegiance to God, but they were saved because of Rahab's allegiance. Next chapter, Aiken's entire family will be judged for his sin. That's the corporate mentality that just doesn't process well for our 2026 Western American brain. But in this time, sacrificing one city in order to bring about revolution or revival in the entire country is absolutely the mentality that they had and absolutely the kind of history that is written on the pages of human history. So I'm not going to mince words. I absolutely do believe that there were young people who died here. Think about it this way. If you had, you were in a car accident and your foot was mangled beyond repair, and the choice is leave the foot and you could risk sepsis or further infection, which then could lead to a worse part of the body, or you could amputate the foot, which would be amazing and Halloween to be a pirate, just saying. Is the choice to amputate the foot the better choice to save the body? Yes. Is the choice to pull a tooth if it's infected before it infects anything else? Yes. Does that not mean that the amputation is not violent? It totally is. Let's not pretend it's not. But we today have zero problems saying, sacrifice the foot to save the kid, sacrifice the hand to save the life. We don't have a problem with that kind of logic. It becomes morally repugnant for us when we look at it at the larger scale of sacrifice the city to save the country. God is, also keep in mind, this has been 470 years, approximately 15 to 17 generations of Canaanites who never turned away from their sinful evil practices. How many generations before we keep letting them sacrifice their own children? If we could save and stop one city, amputate this one city, and hopefully there are more people like Rahab who are going, Sharita, God's God. And guess what? They're saved. Chapter nine, when you get to the Gibeonites, guess what? They're saved because they moved their allegiance to God. So I'm not gonna back down, it's not genocide. But I do believe there were young people in the city because that's what 21 directly implies. And the reason that I believe that God is still loving and just is because it is his job to stop sin from infecting more people. He doesn't want more people burning their children alive on altars. And so what is he going to do? He's going to judge that sin now to hopefully stop it before the sepsis can infect more people and infect his people. What he definitely doesn't want is the Israelites learning from the Canaanite practices and starting to sacrifice their own children. Unfortunately, spoiler alert, Rahab, if you read the rest of the Old Testament, because the Canaanites were not all exterminated, Israel did begin to take on some of those Canaanite practices. This is the imputation that was intended to stop that sepsis. It failed and therein lies the rub between human freedom, right? The Israelites still had the right to choose. And yeah, I said that, another key detail. Ancient Near Eastern thought prioritizes the unit over the individual, ours does not, and we should not force a modern individualistic world view into a text centuries before it has existed. This also is not an isolated idea. I mentioned the Middle East, I mentioned Asia, that's why. This is also why I felt super inadequate, because I knew I had to say all this today. God is loving and he is merciful, but he is also righteous and he is also judged. There will come a day in eternity future from this moment where everyone will be judged for the sin of their life. Those who have turned to Christ, like Rahab and the Gibeonites, they will be saved from harem and moved over to holy. Everybody who has not made the allegiance choice to be allegiance to Christ will be left to be judged for their own sin. That's the other reality that makes us uncomfortable. We are all living in Jericho. We are all faced with that choice of allegiance could bring salvation. And then finally, letter D, this is the last piece here. Inheritance is kept by allegiance, not entitlement. This is where Joshua in 22, he sends the two men to spy out the land, go into the prostitute's house, bring her out all who belong to her in accordance with your oath. This is Rahab's entire family being saved because of her allegiance. Don't read 21 without 22. God devoted the city to harem for his judgment and destruction on sin. But even in the midst of his judgment and destruction on sin, salvation by faith and allegiance brought salvation to an entire household. 23, so the young men do exactly. And then they bring and they place Rahab outside the camp of Israel because she's not expected to go to war for Israel. Her family just received salvation. Boom, you're out, here you go. Here's your new camp. 24, they burned the city and everything in it. They put the silver, the gold, the bronze. Somebody is gonna ask why did they have to burn the city? Because they're not allowed to take any of the spoils of war from this engagement. This is the first. God said, no, I did this for you. And to show me that you trust me to do it further, you don't get to keep anything from this engagement. You're gonna burn the city and the entire city is an offering to me. Just like in the New Testament, we call it the offering of first fruits. That's why generally tithes come out before everything else. Why? Because we're supposed to give God first and then he blesses us with the remainder. That's the principle that's at play here. They dedicate the entire city to the Lord, burn the entire thing to the ground. They kept no weapons. They kept no money. They kept no sheep. That's why they killed all the animals because at their time, herds were funds. Herds were business. You don't get to pillage this city and turn yourself into wealthy. This was devoted to me and it will go only to me. The metal items left the city and went to God's treasury, likely because the fire would not have completely destroyed them and somebody might have gone back to get them later. So God said, no, that'd be mine. But in his treasury and then the entire rest of the city is burned. 25, but Joshua spared Rahab, the prostitute with her family and all who belonged to her because she hid the men, Joshua. She hid the men who had spies. Notice the end of 25 and she lives among the Israelites to this day. Rahab got to live in an inheritance that was never promised to her but that she was grafted into by faith. What does that look like? It looks exactly like Paul in the New Testament. This is Gentile salvation and inclusion in the inheritance thousands of years before Jesus. And 26, at that time, Joshua pronounced a solemn oath. Cursed before the Lord is anyone who undertakes to rebuild this city at the cost of his firstborn. He will lay its foundations and at the cost of his youngest, he will set up his gates. If you turn in your Bible to 1 Kings, chapter 16 verse 34, someone is stupid enough to try to do that. And yes, both of his sons died. So the Lord, verse 27, so the Lord was with Joshua and his fame spread throughout the land. Who is the active agent in every step of this chapter? It's God. God directed his children to walk. God brought down the city. God directed them to give the city to him as an offering. God directed them to save Rahab and her entire family by faith. God is the active agent. But the humans are the one who are following him to receive what was given. And if we don't stop and see the allegiance within judgment, then you're missing the big picture. Yes, there is judgment here. There is judgment for sin, not judgment on a people, not because of who they were, but because of what they did. And even in the midst of that judgment, the moment that one woman said, no, we've heard and I believe, bam, salvation for your whole family. And if you go to chapter nine, you would see even more salvation. So here's the takeaway as I bring this in and then Mel, I got like maybe 10 minutes. Here's your takeaway. Godly inheritance is received by faith, held in stewardship and kept by allegiance. We never force our way into inheritance from God. That is true of the Israelites outside the city and it is true of Rahab inside the city. Both ended up with the inheritance received by faith, held in stewardship and kept by allegiance. Neither got what they received from God by force, but they gained it by faith.
