# Transcript: Kingdom Discernment Sermon On The Mount
Date: 2026-05-17

---

Well, good morning. Welcome to Catalyst. I'm Dr. Bill, and I am privileged to be the pastor and primary teacher here at Catalyst Community Church. For all of you who are joining us online, whether you are currently live and in our live chat, or you are watching this video after the fact, being a part of our extended family, thank you for being here with us today. As you saw in the intro video, we are going to be continuing our series on the Sermon on the Mount. But before I get there, I want to do just a very simple plug. On June the 14th and 17th, we will be hosting here at Catalyst Family Bible Conference. Family Bible Conference is four nights. So Sunday night, Monday night, Tuesday night, Wednesday night, where we will have classes for adults, teens, elementary, and toddler, exploring four of the biggest questions about Jesus. When we as Christians claim that Jesus is the promised Messiah from the Old Testament, that's a claim. And we got to back that claim up with evidence, where it's not really to believe. When we claim that Jesus was a miracle worker, and he did miracles before the age of science, are miracles still possible today? We got to defend that claim. When we claim that Jesus is the only way to heaven, that's a claim that we have to defend. So I just want to invite everybody who is here in the Wilmington campus to join us at Family Bible Conference. You can get all the information at FamilyBibleConference.com. You can sign up in the Catalyst app. For all of you who are part of our online family, we are not going to live stream Family Bible Conference in real time, because it requires a large amount of volunteers to be able to run four simultaneous classes all at the same time for that length. What we are going to do, however, is make sure that all of my teaching lectures from all four nights are recorded, and they will get edited, and be posted into the Catalyst app as quickly as I can do so. As soon as Family Bible Conference is over. So for all of you who are here, that means I need you to sign up. I also need you to sign up to volunteer, because you will not miss a night of teaching. You'll be able to catch it right in the app. For all of you who are part of our online family, I look forward to being able to get all the videos there for you, and then either have a live chat or something where we can talk about that material. So as we continue getting through Jesus' sermon on the mount, here is the key thought that holds all of these messages together. The sermon on the mount is not a checklist for Christian goodness. It is the DNA of kingdom citizenship. The sermon on the mount is not a checklist for Christian goodness. It is a DNA for kingdom citizenship. For those of you who have the Catalyst app, if you open it and scroll down to the blue box that says sermon notes, you will find all of my sermon notes available for you. You can email them to yourself. You can take notes. That is also where the Q&A button is. So if you're new to Catalyst, even if you're joining us online, we do question and answer at the end of every sermon. You are free to ask any question you want. You are free to disagree with me. You are free to argue with me. I welcome it. But we're going to do all of that Q&A at the end of the sermon. So please, if you have the Catalyst app, you can jump in there. If you're in our live chat, our online host will give you a link specifically to that question form, so that you don't have to leave being a part of the digital church to ask your question. So when I say that the Sermon on the Mount is the DNA of kingdom citizenship, that means it is the place where all of our Christian lifestyle flows from. And this is super important because we live in a broken world with broken people and sometimes well-meaning but mistaken Christians have given the impression that we have to be good enough before we can follow Jesus. Right? I'm sure no one in this room because everybody here who's looking at me is super Christian. I get that, right? You know, especially Jim, super Christian. But we've given the mistaken impression that you have to like clean the fish before you catch the fish, which doesn't make a lot of sense to me. We come to Jesus as broken people. If you're new to the Catalyst family, welcome to a family full of broken people. We're all broken in different ways. Our stories carry the scars of our history, and that's okay. You don't have to walk in the door pretending like your life is perfect and you're going to be on the Brady Bunch. We all come with our own set of stories, and that's why the kingdom DNA is so important, is because no matter where your story started, as soon as it includes Jesus, you get a new chapter. And that Jesus chapter allows us to grow as the body of Christ and grow closer together. The title of this morning's message is Kingdom Discernment. Kingdom Discernment. And our text is going to be Matthew chapter 7, verses 1 through 12. So if you're in the Catalyst app and you're in the sermon notes, you'll see I put all the verses there for you. They're the ones in red. Even if it's not directly quoting Jesus, I put all of the scriptures in red in the notes, so it stands out and it's easy to see. If you brought your Bibles, whether they're physical or digital, I invite you to turn or tap with me to Matthew chapter 7. I want to read the first 12 verses and then I want to go back, chop it up and walk through it. So let's read Matthew chapter 7, starting in verse 1. Do not judge, or you will be judged. In the same way you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use, it will be measured to you. Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother's eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye? How can you say to your brother, let me take the speck out of your eye when all the time there is a plank in your own eye? You hypocrite. First, take the plank out of your own eye. Then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother's eye. Do not give dogs what is sacred. Do not throw your pearls to pigs. If you do, they may trample them under their feet, and turn and tear you to pieces. Ask and it will be given to you. Seek and you will find. Knock and the door will be opened to you. For everyone who asks receives, the one who seeks finds, and the one who knocks the door will be opened. Which of you, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, we'll give him a snake? If you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him? So in everything, do to others what you would have them do to you, for this sums up the law and the prophets. So that's that's as much of Jesus's sermon as we're going to look at today. Let's rewind back to the top. You'll see there in your notes the first point in my sermon here is, Kingdom citizens avoid authoritarian judgment. The overall focus is, you know, realize we've been breaking apart Jesus's three chapter sermon over the last several weeks, and we walked through several pieces of it as it flows together. The main focus of this this 12 verse section is kingdom citizens use wisdom in compassion in discerning. Not that we don't discern at all. That's a big difference. And here's why. So first point, kingdom citizens avoid authoritarian judgment. Do not judge or you will be judged. This I think this section of his sermon has some of the most misunderstood lines in all of Christianity, and we have to start with this one. Do not judge or you will be judged. The verb to judge here literally means to pass judgment on another. Now in our modern world, we have a lot of people who are not going to be judged. They're going to be judged. They're going to be judged. We pass judgment on another. Now in our modern day society, we have judges just like they had in Roman times. And our judges do sit at an elevated seat, just like in Roman times. And what's the name of the elevated seat of authority in the first century in the Roman Empire? Anybody? Yeah, Bema. I heard it. The Bema seat, right? We use that for the Bema judgment later. But in the United States judicial system, the judge sits at the bench. I heard somebody say it. The bench, right? And when the judge sits at the bench, that's very different than the baseball player who sits at the bench, right? Because the bench in the dugout and the bench in the courtroom are very different things. The reason I say that is when you read a sentence like, Do not judge or you too will be judged, we should have been over bent and stretched out of shape to the point that Christians feel like we should give up all discernment. We should give up all moral thinking. We should no longer measure between holy and unholy. We should no longer measure between right and wrong. And we should no longer attempt to correct one another. That is not what Jesus is saying. He's not saying don't judge. Why do I know that? Because in the very next verse, that's what the consequences of your judging will be. Why is it important that he uses the word judge? Because just like there's a difference between the bench that the judge in the courtroom sits on and the bench that's in the dugout, there's a difference in the judgment in this verse. When he says, Do not judge, he is saying, Do not assume you have authority over someone to pass ruling judgment on them. That is very different than going to my brother and saying, John, you and I have been friends for a long time. I see this thing in your character. I think we should pray about changing it. The second one is not judgment. That's brotherly concern for my boy's discipleship. That's not judgment. I didn't put myself in authority over John and say, John, I hereby decree. Right? I didn't do that. So when Jesus says, Do not judge, he is absolutely not telling you that you're not allowed to discern between holy and unholy. You're not allowed to discern between right and wrong, and you're not allowed to bring correction to another person. He's saying you're not allowed to have arrogant, harsh criticism. Now that sounds very different than most of the times that I've heard this verse yelled at me. The moment you point out something's unholy, the Bible says, Do not judge. You know what it else says? A whole lot of other things in those 66 books. Right? Like, why do we take the one verse out of context? Because people don't like being corrected. And Jesus will address that later in this message of how we decide that. But the first thing I need you to understand is, as a Christian, you are not to hang up your discernment. In fact, it's a gift of the spirit. You know that? The gift of discerning is an absolute gift of the Holy Spirit. So we're not supposed to stop discerning. We're supposed to stop being harsh critics of people. Here's the difference. Your discernment is internal. Your criticism is external. I am not asking you to give up judging between holy and unholy. How are you supposed to become more like Christ if you can no longer judge between holy and unholy? Here's verse 2, and here's where this goes. For in the same way you judge others, you will be judged. And the measure you use, it will be measured to you. So here's the principle that goes with do not judge. Jesus is not saying no longer make moral distinctions. What he's saying is, John, you better be ready because Jesus is going to treat you the way you treat everybody else. How's that judgment going? Right? And I'm picking on my friend, John, but it really goes to all of us. Jesus is not saying stop making, stop making discerning choices. He's not saying stop using wisdom. What he's saying is God and his ultimate justice is going to use the standard by which you judge everyone else to judge you. So now maybe you might want to think about how you treat other people. Because the Holy Spirit is going to open that book and be like, yo, Tasha did this, this, this, and this. All right, she gets this, this, this, and this. That's a sobering statement. So it's not don't judge. It's not give it up. It's the fact that the way we judge is not judgment. It's not judgment. It's not judgment. It's not judgment. It's not judgment. It's not judgment. So the way we discern and address our fellow brothers and sisters in Christ. And let me say another thing about harsh criticism. We have a term in our culture called Bible thumper, right? I know that's usually more of a southern term, but I grew up in the south. And so a Bible thumper is someone who tries to apply the words of scripture to someone who's not mature enough yet to respect it. That's a bad call. And Jesus addresses that later on in this very section. But I need you to understand as my fellow brothers and sisters in Christ, do not give up your discernment. Do not relegate deciding what's moral and what's immoral, what's ethical and non-ethical, what's holy and what's unholy because someone tries to tell you, well, Jesus says, do not judge. No, what he said was, is be careful. Don't judge because it's going to be muted back to you the way you judge others. But that's not the end of the story. That's literally just point one. Here's point two. Kingdom citizens correct others only after correcting themselves. So here's the next step. It's not don't give it up. It's this is the process you should follow when using discernment and applying it to someone else. Letter B, Kingdom citizens correct others only after they correct themselves. Look at verse three. Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother's eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye? Stop. Obviously, now Jesus is making an example, right? Interestingly, Jesus was a carpenter. We use the word carpenter. He was likely met more of a works with his hand maker. Could have been wood, could have been stone, could have been clay. He was, you know, a mixture of carpenter and Mason and architect and builder and, you know, all those things. So I'm sure at some point and I'm going to go off page, right? This is a this is a this is a Dr. Bill guess I'm guessing for a man who worked with his hands with his daddy from the time he was little. Jesus got at least something in his eye once, right? Just maybe. So he's now making an analogy here. I need you to understand that both people in verse three have something wrong with them. Both people have something in their eye. Now, Jesus specifically says a speck of sawdust and a plank. So now we need to understand both people have something wrong, but they're not at the same level, right? Somebody has something very small that needs correction and somebody has something much larger that needs correction. But let's just be honest. We all need correction. Okay. So then we get to verse. So verse three that there's an actual real spiritual blemish blemish in someone's character, but they are not equal. One person has a minor blenish and one person has a major blemish. Verse four. How can you say to your brother, let me take the speck out of your eye while at the time there is a plank in your own eye? Jesus is saying the person who has the larger spiritual problem is taking it upon themselves to correct the person with the smaller spiritual problem. And here's the problem with Christians. We do this all the time. We give ourselves permission to judge others at a standard that we don't hold ourselves to, which is very hypocritical. I expect Jim to be way holier than me because I pick on him all the time to help keep him humble. You guys don't understand all these jokes. It's discipleship for my best friend. Right. See, look, now I just took credit and made it a good thing for me to pick on you. Watch out. The example that Jesus makes, let's be honest, it's it's a fictional story. They're not two real people. There's not an actual wooden plank sticking out of someone's eye. He's making the point that the person who is trying to correct someone over something very small in an area that they have a large gap in their character is automatically verse five. You hypocrite. If you attempt to correct someone in an area that you do not already have on lock, you are a hypocrite. So says Jesus, not me. Argue with the king. I'm literally just that I like literally. I just work here. That's my job. Verse five, you hypocrite. And here's where it really gets dicey. Right. So, look, Scott, let's get uncomfortable. You hypocrite. First, take the plank out of your own eye. Then you will see clearly to remove the spec from your brother's eye. So even though the person had a plank in their eye, their spiritual discernment wasn't wrong. The person did, in fact, have a spec in their eye. They weren't supposed to give up the discernment. You're not supposed to apply your discernment until you apply it to yourself first. Deal with that area of your life first. Get your Christian character on lock and in step with the king. And then, see, that's the problem. The guy with the plank in his eye wasn't wrong in his vision. He was wrong in his application. He saw the spec for what it was. I often wonder, did Jesus allow the guy with the plank to see the spec? Because if you have a major spiritual weakness in an area, Barry, isn't it interesting that he could see the standard in someone else but not see the standard in the mirror when he looked at himself? This analogy makes me super uncomfortable when I go home. Because I'm like, and I'm sure you guys get this in my role as pastor, I often get to visit families on their worst days. I see people in their most raw. And that's just part of the privilege of the job. It'd be very easy for me to judge myself on my best day against everybody else's worst day. Right now, man, I'm a Phil's meet. I'm a Phil so holy that my head wouldn't even fit in the building. But that's the point. I should be looking at myself first with that clear standard of judgment. Fix the problem. Fix the blemish in my spiritual character and then attempt to speak to my brother about it. That's not hypocritical. That's discipleship. So let's just lay the gauntlet down right now. We should bring spiritual correction to our fellow brothers and sisters in Christ. We absolutely should. You know what you shouldn't do? Try to bring spiritual correction in an area that you haven't got on lock in your life. That's when you come across as a hypocrite. That's when we come across as judgmental. And why? Oh, why? Oh, why? If I could pick up this microphone, I'd bang it. Why do we expect people who have not come to Christ to live like those who have? Just stop. Just stop. Those who are still in the pre-Christian category, which is my favorite term for those who have not followed Christ yet. Everybody who's not followed Christ, they're not lost, right? Are they not saved? Yes. But we should stop using terms like non-Christian, unsaved, lost. You know what all of those terms do? All of those terms tribally define our terms first and everybody else in terms of us. Okay, fine. I like the term pre-Christian because that gives me the opportunity that any person who's a pre-Christian could soon become a full Christian. But while they're in the pre-Christian category, can we please stop trying to get people to act like they have Christian ethical moral values when they don't have the foundation of Jesus is the King that makes those values real? That's why this whole sermon is the way it is. Because the DNA of being a kingdom citizen flows out of the relationship with Jesus and forces me to examine my own character, my own blemishes, my own planks in my own eye before I can bring correction to someone else. And if you could do that, it goes better. Before you bring up someone else's issue, take a hard look in a very, very close mirror in your own version of that same issue. And then if nothing else, and because Jim and I have had several non-Sunday morning conversations, Jim and I both had areas of our life that we've had to work on, areas where we needed improvement. Where the Holy Spirit has built things in us that weren't there originally. When you go to speak to your brother or your sister, and it's an area that you've already put in the work, you immediately speak with more compassion because you know how hard it was. When you go to speak to somebody in an area that you never had to work on, you don't know how hard it was to climb out of that mud hole and get clean. You know how hard it was to work through that difficulty and get that blemish out. So just use some wisdom in the way you apply it. That gets me to my third point. Kingdom citizens read the room before they speak. If you get nothing else out of today's sermon, please listen to this next point. I would say this is one of the most misunderstood verses in the entire scriptures. I'm going to do my best to present it in the correct light, what I believe Jesus is saying. Verse six, do not give dogs what is sacred. Do not throw your pearls to pigs. Stop. Just go ahead and say it. That sounds kind of weird, doesn't it, Scott? Like we're in this whole, this whole big sermon about kingdom DNA and Jesus's kingship and our citizenship. And don't throw to dogs what is sacred or throw your pearls to pigs. Has anybody ever read that verse and went, what? That's why context matters, right? What is Jesus just finished teaching us? He's just finished teaching us that we should correct one another, but we should do so with compassion and wisdom. And then he drops this fortune cookie piece. Don't give to dogs what is sacred or throw your pearls to pigs. What do both of those things have in common? Dogs and sacred animals do not see value in sacred things. Pearls to pigs. Same point. Animals don't see value in valuable things. So when I tie this idea of the dogs in the sacred or the pearls to the pigs to the immediate context, what is Jesus saying? Here it is. Don't try to bring spiritual correction to someone who doesn't value it. See, when you put it in context, it's really not a mystery. It's not nearly as mysterious as it looks. He just finished telling us about the guy with the speck and the plank, which is all about the appropriate way to bring spiritual correction. And then he says this. Don't, if you would allow me to rephrase this verse, here it is. Don't try to offer Christian wisdom or correction to someone who doesn't value it. Because it's a waste of time and relationship. Look at the latter half of verse six. Do not throw your pearls to pigs. If you do, if you do what? If you attempt to bring spiritual correction to someone who does not value it, they may trample them, meaning the pearls, the actual correction. So if I attempt to bring spiritual correction to someone who doesn't value it, they will trample it under their feet and turn and take it away. If someone who doesn't value it, they will trample it under their feet and turn and tear me to pieces. That happens a lot, don't it? Right. You go to somebody who is not ready to hear. They are not on your maturity train. They are just living a life, doing a best. And you try to bring them a piece of spiritual correction. And they don't value it. Not only do they step on it. But they turn against you. Jesus is saying, now let me just read the verse again. Just exactly the way Jesus says it. Do not give dogs what is sacred. Do not throw your pearls to pigs. If you do, they may trample them under their feet and turn and tear you to pieces. The entire verse makes sense. When you connect it. Right? That's the big problem with quoting verses out of context. You quote some random Bible verse and you have no idea what book it came from. You have no idea what chapter in the Bible it comes from. What was happening during that time. What is the purpose of Jesus in this entire sermon? All of those things make sense. The pearls, because I'll tell you this. And you don't have to raise your hand. But if you are next to your spouse, this is an elbow moment for sure. Just stretch it a little bit. Have you ever received spiritual correction from someone and loved them for it? Right? Has somebody ever spoken to your life about something biblical and you went, man, I appreciate that. Even if it was hard to hear. Right? Even if it was hard to hear, was it good to hear? Yes. I'm thinking of two instances. One in which I was the speaker and one in which I was the speakee. The second instance was my mentor, Pastor Rick Grant. Who is still the godliest man that I have ever known. Those of you who were here on my installation Sunday that the elders in the search team flew him up from Florida. He spoke at my very first Sunday. He was the very large Canadian man that I literally ran across this room and like tackled and cried into his chest. Pastor Rick has poured more into my life than any other human being except for my wife in my life. He taught me within the first, I think, three months that we were together. A simple lesson that has changed the trajectory of who I have become as a man. He said, never let your gift take you where your character won't keep you. Miss Claudia, I wish I could take credit for that. I can't. That is Pastor Rick Grant, godliest man I've ever known. Never let your gift take you where your character won't keep you. That little nugget, John, that has sustained me for 22 years of ministry. If he said nothing else in my life, that one little nugget has shown up so many times. So many over and over and over and reminded me that no matter how gifted and talented and good looking I may be, and I am, all those things, right? The only thing that's better than all of that is my humility, right? No, no matter how gifted you are, your character can destroy it in a moment. No matter how talented you are, your character will destroy it in a moment. Value your character more than any gifting, more than any opportunity, more than any paycheck, more than any church, more than any government style, more than any book deal, more than any conference opportunity. Because the moment you lose your character, you lose it all. All of that is buried in that little nugget. The amount of times I have called him just to say, Pastor Rick, I love you, it was true. Again, I mean 22 years he's he's 22 years. He's been my mentor. He's prayed with me over every job I've ever had. That nugget has sustained me. Now, when I was the talker, I had a situation in a previous church. It's not here, but don't look around the room and try to figure out who this is. This person doesn't exist in this room. You know, I'm not going to be able to do that. I'm not going to be able to do that. I'm not going to be able to do that. It's not here, but don't look around the room and try to figure out who this is. This person doesn't exist in this room. If you need to look at somebody because you're uncomfortable, you can look at Jim. At a previous church I was at, we had some friends and the husband the kids had come over our house. The kids were all playing together because the husband and wife had to go run some errands and they needed somewhere for their kids to be during the day. And since Melanie worked from home and I was able to be home from the church, all the kids came to our house and they all played together for the evening. So Dad comes over to pick the kids up. I come out to the driveway to meet Dad and I climb up in his pickup truck because this is in the country. And I say, hey man, can we talk for a quick second? And some of you heard me tell this story. He was a boxer. So you see, understand when you're bringing correction to a pig that's way bigger than you and can trample you, you need to be very considerate of how you speak. But I had to speak to him and I said, bro, I love you and your wife and my family loves hanging out with you. But I can't in good conscience bring my kids around your family because I don't like the way you talk to your wife in public. And if you talk to her that way in public, you and I both know you say way worse behind closed doors where your kids are still listening. So either you need to change the way you treat your wife or we need to change the way our families are friends. I said, you can hit me or we can pray about it. One of the two. But I can't let another the Holy Spirit would not let another moment go by in my conscience without me saying the thing. Praise God. Didn't get a black eye that day. He said, wow, never had somebody care enough to insult me like that. And then we talked about what was really going on and the Holy Spirit did some good stuff. That's bringing correction in a way that's valued. When Pastor Pastor Rick could call my phone right now and I will put all of you on hold to answer his call. That's how valuable he is when he speaks in my life. It's better than gold. It's better than pearls. But if I tried to bring that same correction to someone I just met and tried to teach them that same rule, even though the rule is like gold to me, it's going to be meaningless to somebody else. That's the pearls before swine. That's the pearls before swine. Does that make sense to everybody? It's not meant to be complicated. You've got to know who you're talking to is the fourth point. Kingdom citizens continually seek God's wisdom. Here's another way misunderstood verse. Verse seven. Ask it will be given unto you, see are given to you seek and you will find knock and the door will be open to you. And verse eight. Everyone who asks receives who seeks finds and the one who knocks the door will be open. The number of times I have heard this verse used as if God is a genie in a magic lamp and you just have to rub it the right way and he gives you everything you want. That is not the context of this passage. You know what's really uncomfortable? The context of this passage is Christian correction and wisdom. So now what does it mean? Well, if Jesus is telling me that I should not give up my discernment, that I should be willing to correct my brothers and sisters, I should do so after I've addressed my own issues. And I should do so by making sure that the person I'm speaking to will value the correction. Now, what does it mean when he says ask it will be given unto you, seek and you will find knock and the door will be open unto you. By the way, I need you to point out that all of the verses, all the verbs, excuse me, like I speak, all of the verbs in verse seven are continual verbs. It means ask and keep asking, seek and keep seeking, knock and keep knocking. They are continual verbs. Why? Because everyone who asks for Steve's, the one who seeks finds and the one who knocks the door will be open. All of this is in relation to Christian correction and wisdom. It's not a magic Bible verse that you just get to like bippity boppity boop your problems in your life and make magic. Jesus, fairy godmother, make things happen. I will tell you this. I have never had God leave me hanging when I said, Lord, I know my friend needs you. How do I speak to him the right way? That prayer has never gone unanswered. It may have been really scary to say what I needed. Can you wait? I'm talking. I don't know why I forgot to turn my phone off today. I've never had God leave me hanging when discipleship was on the line, when I needed to speak to my brother or my sister, when I needed to bring a word of correction, a word of wisdom, a word of discernment. The Holy Spirit has never not shown me what to do. You understand God answers all prayer with one of three answers. You can get a yes, you can get a no, and you can get a not yet. That third answer is entirely the most frustrating. That third answer is entirely the most frustrating. Because that means, John, we've got to wait. I'm not giving. And what's the problem with the not yet is you might still get the no. But the answer is not yet. The answer is not yours to have right now. Jesus is saying that when we are in the situation where we should be helping our brothers and sisters to live the kingdom DNA out and you have to speak to your brother or your sister and bring correction and you've already dealt with yourself. You're not a hypocrite. You've already read the room. They're going to value what you have to say. And now you've got a pony up and say what you need to say. Say the uncomfortable thing. God will never leave you hanging. That's what that verse is about. It's not about just you'll get everything you pray for when you want it. No, it's when you step into someone's mess. To help lift them out of it. God will use through you. And he will never not open that door. This is not Christian spell casting. This is Christian discernment in relationship. And then he continues in verse nine. This is connected to the previous section. Which of you, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone or verse 10 if he asked for a fish will give him a snake. This is Jesus telling you that when you were in that moment, do you really think God is not going to deliver? You ask him for bread. Is he going to give you a stone? You ask him for a fish. He's going to give you a snake. Verse 11. Now he brings it in. If you then though you are evil, I love that he just throws that in there. He's like, yo, Jesse, you be evil. But. If you who are evil know how to give good gifts to your children. How much more will your father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him? This is another one of those passage that has been co-opted by the prosperity theology to believe that good gifts equals money. Do you notice that in this whole section we dealt with money was like two, three weeks ago, right? We dealt with money. You can't you can't have God and money as your number one priority. This is not about money. This is about correction in relationship. This is about wisdom. This is about discernment. If we trust God and I have to go and have a tough conversation with my brother. Jim Roe. We talk about that thing. He's like, yeah, I know. Because that's who Jim is. Jim's pretty easy going. There's also a whole lot there to work with. So you pick something. If God is such a good father, he's not going to leave us hanging. But here's the other thing. We can't use spiritual discernment without his help. Spiritual discernment is not your personal feelings on the matter. Spiritual discernment is not your willies is not what's going on in the back of your neck. It's not how you feel or what you think. All of these examples are when we ask God, he gives, right? You ask for the bread. He doesn't give you a stone. You ask for the fish. He doesn't give you a snake. You keep asking and he will give. That means the true application of spiritual discernment cannot be done absent. God in the relationship that you're trying to use it in. Don't give what you think is right and call it God. Please don't do that. Please. I beg of you. Don't give what you think is right. Don't use your personal knowledge about someone's private situation and what you think they should do and wrap it in Jesus flavored language and call it discernment. If you haven't prayed and asked God what the right thing is to say to them, please shut your mouth. Speak to the boss first. Get his insight before you decide to use your insight. Or you just might get your own insight. Before you decide to use your insight or you just might give somebody a stone when they need bread or a snake when they need fish. That's the danger, right? We should be willing to bring correction to each other. We should be willing to bring growth and development and discipleship to each other that that should never be done absent the one who gives the real true good gifts. That's how all of this piece fits together. We cannot do true spiritual discernment without the help of God. Are you actually asking God for wisdom before hard conversations? Are you just going on your own instincts of what you think that person should do because that's the way you want them to act. That's hard. Because I'll be honest. There are certain people in my life. I want them to act the way I want them to act. I mean, can we just be honest with each other? My life would be happier if everybody did what Melanie wanted all the time. But Melanie's not God. As much as the voice of the Holy Spirit, Scott, many times the voice of the Holy Spirit sounds like Melanie Ohms. I will say that. I know I'm wise enough to know my wife isn't God. She knows him. There's a difference. My wife knows the voice of the Holy Spirit and she will bring it to me. And when she brings it with that certain tone in her voice, doesn't matter how many years I went to college, I will listen to the voice of the Holy Spirit come out of my wife's mouth any day. Because you can't do it without him. Before that next difficult relational conversation, stop and ask God specifically, Lord, what do you want me to say and how should I say it? And I'll be honest. Don't be surprised if you don't like the answer to that question. Because God just may have you lay the conversation up in a way that's uncomfortable for you, but it's the right way for them. That's what they need to hear. You're bringing you're trying to get the spec out of their eye because you've already dealt with the plank and you've already made sure they would value it and all those other things. And then he brings it in for a landing here with the fifth point. Kingdom citizens discern with compassion. And I kind of stole this point a little earlier, but I'm going to use it again. Verse 12. So in everything, this means in everything from verse one all the way down, finding the spec in your eye, making sure that they have value, making sure you're not a hypocrite in everything you do. Due to others that would you would have them do to you for this sums up the law and the prophets. Usually when we teach this to children, we call it the Golden Rule. The Golden Rule. Treat others the way you would want to be treated. Not, don't do to others what you don't want done to you. That's the Silver Rule. It means to do to others, bring correction to others the way you would want it brought to you. The Golden Rule is the essence of Christian compassion. Would you want to be corrected the way you are correcting someone else? Then maybe you should rethink your words. Think of that one person that's probably popped up in your mind during the sermon that you you feel like you might need to have a hard conversation with. How would you want to be approached if the roles were reversed and they were approaching you about that thing? That thing you need to talk about. This is where Christian relationship meets the very real hard rubber of the road of we have to live it day by day. This is not Bible study. This is not we're just going to learn one thing and walk away and whoo better. Now this is every day because iron doesn't sharpen iron if it doesn't come in contact with each other. Right. You don't get to sharpen a knife by keeping it in the box and the sharpening stones in the other box. You have to get in proximity. You have to be in relationship. You have to be close enough to rub up against each other and there's going to be some scraping. There's going to be some heat. There's going to be some friction. Right. You got to have a relationship that is strong enough to withstand the friction or you will never get the true benefit of good healthy Christian relationship. So let me just ask a simple question. How many people do you have in your life right now who can pick up their phone and speak into your character? I have a few. How many people can you pick up the phone right now and speak into theirs? How many people can you challenge for those of you who are married? How many people could you call and talk to them about the way they talk to their wife? Or wives the way they speak of their husbands? How many people do you know that you could speak to the way they parent their kids? How many people do you know and that they wouldn't take a swing at you for doing so? I mean and would value it, would appreciate it, would see it as valuable that someone else wants to help them live more like Christ. If we are not willing to help each other, the world is not going to help us reflect Jesus. The world does not want you to live for Jesus. He wants you to live for Mises. Sorry, I didn't invent that one. That one's old, like before you were born old. So just let it ride. The world wants us to back down from uncomfortable conversation and just authorize everybody their own autonomy. Kingdom DNA flows from Kingdom authority, which puts him as the boss. Not me, not Jim and Bill and the other elders, not the ministry leaders of the staff. He is the only boss that matters and the rest of us all work for him. But he has given us an outline of Kingdom DNA that requires us to be in good, vulnerable relationship with each other and bring solid Christian correction and do that discernment with wisdom and compassion. So here's the takeaway as I bring this in for a landing. Mel, if you could start feeding me the questions we have for today. Here's your takeaway. Jesus never stead, never said to stop judging completely. He expects Kingdom citizens to discern wisely and correct compassionately. The next time someone tells you, well, you're a Christian, you're not supposed to judge. Really? Is that really what Jesus said? Because the very next verse said, take the plank out of your eye so I can help you take the speck out of yours. The very next verse said to do it, but to do it rightly, not hypocritically, compassionately, with wisdom. Make sure the person you're bringing correction to values it. And listen, if you start trying to have a spiritual corrective conversation and you're not a Christian, if you start trying to have a spiritual corrective conversation and they get combative, can you please shut up? That's the signal that they're not ready to value what you have to bring. Don't force it down their throats. That's what gives us a bad rap. You should have that spiritually corrective conversation with somebody who's ready to hear it.
