# Transcript: Sermon On The Mount   07   Kingdom Exclusivity
Date: 2026-05-24

---

Well, good morning. Welcome to Catalyst. I am Dr. Bill, and I am privileged to be the pastor and the primary teacher here at Catalyst Community Church. For all of you who are a part of our online service, whether you're watching on a phone, a tablet, whether you're in the live chat, I got a chance to look at the live chat right before I came up. We have several family members who are sick and not able to be here physically, and it's great that they're able to be there digitally and still communicate with each other. As many of you know, I believe that the pulpit and the pastorate is intended to be apolitical, intended to not have a political affiliation, and I stand by that. But on a weekend like this weekend, when our nation is honoring those who have given their lives for the freedoms that we use every single Sunday when we gather together to proclaim the name of Jesus, I do not believe that it is partisan to take a moment and thank the Lord for the country we live in and those who have bled and given the ultimate sacrifice for the freedoms that we celebrate. So if you would just please pray with me. King Jesus, I thank you that it is you who said that greater love has no man than to lay his life down for his friend. Lord, I thank you for all the brave, courageous, sacrificial men and women who have given their lives for the freedoms that we regularly celebrate in this country. Lord, I thank you for the number of soldiers and sailors and airmen and coasties and now space force ins that protect our country and who give the ultimate sacrifice so we can freely and unashamedly declare the name of Jesus on the streets of America. Lord, thank you for providing a foundation for the megaphone that is the gospel that comes out of our country. For every family who has experienced that loss, Lord, I pray that you would comfort them this weekend. I pray that you would bless them this weekend, and I pray that you would help remind them that they are the reason we are able to declare your name as the King of Kings and Lord of Lords without fear of government reprisal. Thank you for blessing our country with the freedom to declare the gospel. In Jesus name, amen. As you saw in the intro video, we are going to be studying the Sermon on the Mount. This will be the final message in this series. We are bringing the Sermon on the Mount in for a landing today, so let me start by giving you the key thought that holds all of these messages together. Here it is. The Sermon on the Mount is not a checklist for Christian goodness. It is the DNA of kingdom citizenship, and I can't stress that enough. The Sermon on the Mount is not a checklist for Christian goodness. It is the DNA of kingdom citizenship. Many times when I was approached with the Sermon on the Mount as a younger child, I wasn't taught that it was about a kingdom. I was taught that it was about me as an individual and how I'm supposed to live for Jesus, and that is true, but the reason we live for Jesus is downstream of the fact that he is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. The reason that we're adopted into a new family and given a heavenly citizenship is downstream of the fact that he is the father adopting us and he is the King of his kingdom. Today the title of my sermon is Kingdom Exclusivity. Kingdom Exclusivity, and before I get started, I want to point out the easiest way to follow along in the sermon today will be in the Catalyst app. If you open it and scroll down to the first row here, of course, if your phone is taller than mine, you might see it, so way to go. It says Sermon Notes. It's blue. If you tap on that, it will open all of my notes for today. It'll give you a space to insert your own notes. It also has the button in there to ask a question, and at the bottom of it you can email all of that to yourself or anyone else. So just want to invite you to follow along. If you are online and you are in our live chat and you're using the Catalyst app, don't go there. The live chat host will give you all the links to the connect card, to the ask a question, so that you can stay involved and engaged there while we all use the app here. So Kingdom Exclusivity, the main focus of this message is this. False citizens are recognizable in this life and the next. We've spent all of the series building on kingdom citizenship, and here as we bring it in for a landing, we have to talk about false citizenship. What does it mean and what does it look like to be a false citizen in the kingdom of God? So the first, so let me do this because I was just about to keep going. Let's read the whole passage first. Let's get the full scope of what Jesus is saying, and then we will go back. So if you brought your Bibles, turn or tap with me to Matthew chapter 7. We're going to look at verses 13 to 29. If you're using the sermon notes in the app, they're already there. We're going to read all of the red lines, and then we'll come back to the beginning. One of my children asked me this past week, Dad, why are the words of Jesus in red if the whole Bible is the word of God? In case anybody, any other kid asked that question, number one, fantastic question. Technically, the red letters are no more important than the black letters. Why we started emphasizing the words of Jesus, I honestly don't know. That's a fantastic Christian history question that I haven't gone back to find yet, but since using red letters for the words of scriptures tends to be that way. That's why it's there in the sermon notes. However, it'll be read no matter what book we're from because it's all the word of God. So here we go. Matthew chapter 7, we start reading in verse 13. It says Jesus speaking on an elevated platform, teaching his sermon on the Mount. Enter through the narrow gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the road that leads to destruction and many enter through it. But small is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life and only a few find it. Watch out for false prophets. They come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ferocious wolves. By their fruit, you will recognize them. Do people pick grapes from thorn bushes or figs from thistles? Likewise, every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit. A good tree cannot bear bad fruit and a bad tree cannot bear good fruit. Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. Thus, by their fruit, you will recognize them. 21. Not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord, will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only the one who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. Many will say to me on that day, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name or drive out demons and in your name perform many miracles? Then I will tell them plainly, I never knew you. Away from me, you evildoers. 24. Therefore, everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock. The rain came down, the streams rose and the winds blew and beat against that house, yet it did not fall because it had its foundation on the rock. But everyone who hears these words of mine and does not put them into practice is like a foolish man who built his house on the sand. The rain came down, the streams rose and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell with a great crash. 25. Verse 28. When Jesus had finished saying these things, the crowds were amazed at his teaching because he taught as one who had authority and not as the teachers of the law. So let's go back to the top. Back to verse 13. Jesus is teaching what it means to be a citizen in his kingdom and the product that comes out of it. And the first point in my sermon this morning is the kingdom is not a universal community. And that sounds super harsh and it sounds super judgy and it sounds super religious, but I have to start with the simple truth that there is no such thing as universal salvation. And this is not me saying it, this is Jesus saying it. Look at verse 13. Enter through the narrow gate. So that's the instruction. Enter through the narrow gate. But then he widens the gaze to show you the whole picture. For wide is the gate and broad is the road that leads to destruction, and many enter through it. And then verse 14 is a part of this thought. But small is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life and only a few find it. So in verse 13 and 14, Jesus presents two gates, he presents two groups, and he presents two destinations. There are two very obvious gates. One is wide, one is narrow. There are two very obvious groups. One is many, one is few. And there are two very obvious destinations. One is destruction and one is life. The key point of Jesus's words here is very clear. In eternity, each of us has two options, life or death. And the choices we make in this life determine our eternal reservations. The way a pastor that I grew up under used to say it is all of us have made our heavenly dinner reservations. The only choice you have is whether you would prefer smoking versus non-smoking. And everybody who's under the age of about 25 didn't think that was funny because you never went to a restaurant and sat next to the smoking section, right? But for all of us who are old, we remember that. I need you to also notice that this point here about the narrow gate and the wide gate, this point is sandwiched between the golden rule, which is where we left off at the end of our last message, and the correction of religious leaders, which is what comes next. So Jesus isn't teaching only about eternity. That would be very easy if you took this out of context to only talk about the eternal impact. But Jesus sandwiches this narrow gate and wide gate, destination of life, destination of death between the golden rule where we left off and the correction of religious leaders here. He is linking daily lifestyle choices to eternal consequences. He's not just teaching an abstract concept about eternity. That doesn't mean that concept isn't true. It is true. But Jesus isn't teaching it like some random abstract theological thought that I just need you to know about your eternal desert reservation. He's linking it between the golden rule and correcting of religious leaders. He's directly linking the path, the gate and the destination to the way his kingdom citizens live directly impacting their eternal reservations. And also here's the I need you to understand. You need to be careful because not everyone claiming to follow Jesus is actually following Jesus. Of course, not y'all, right? We are the number one most perfect church and everybody who walks in door, it's just everybody's Miss Nancy. I know everybody's holy. Everybody's Baptist. Everybody loves Jesus. But in that fictional church in a galaxy far, far away somewhere, or on the fictional Instagram or the fictional Facebook reel, not everybody claiming to follow Jesus is actually following Jesus. Some people are just following a crowd and they're not thinking about where the road and the gate and the destination all linked together. So as we open this morning sermon, I have to ask the simple question. How crowded is the road your faith has been walking? Because if you're walking along with the crowd, you might want to check the destination. Because over the over the years that I have been following Jesus, I will tell you most assuredly there are times it felt like the only people on that road was me, my wife and Jesus. Sometimes the road is lonely. Sometimes the road is rocky. Sometimes the road is painful. Sometimes the road is tearful. That doesn't mean it's the wrong road. Right? Just because you're uncomfortable in your Christianity doesn't mean the doctrine's wrong. Just because you're uncomfortable in your Christianity doesn't mean your brothers and sisters don't love you. Doesn't mean the pastor is hateful. Doesn't mean the church should be canceled. No, sometimes the narrow road is narrow. I will also say this. Walking the narrow road with one or two really trusted friends is one heck of a journey. The road can be narrow and I can still lean on Jim. The road can be narrow and I can still lean on Jim. The road can be narrow and I can still hold my wife's hand. The road can be narrow and I can turn back to my daughters and say look out for that rock. Don't trip. That's enough. But if I got to be on the road where everybody's going, if I got to be on the road where everybody's liking and everybody's following, listen I do absolutely believe there are wonderfully good biblical teachers who have large platforms and I'm not here. Please don't twist my words to say that anybody that has a large following is automatically not representing Jesus. That would be a false conclusion to draw from what I'm saying. What I'm saying is in your personal everyday life, right, the DNA of your kingdom citizenship, are you going along with the crowd or are you following the path that Jesus laid for us? And now we get into how do I recognize those false citizens, those people who claim to be on the narrow path but are really basically just walking with the crowd. Here we go. Letter B. False citizens are exposed by what their life produces. False citizens are exposed by what their life produces. Let's look at verse 15. Watch out for false prophets. Stop. A couple things I need you to understand about this verse. The words that translate to be watch out literally mean to be on the lookout for, to be on guard for with a negative connotation. Not with a hopeful connotation, right? Not with a be on the lookout. Somebody's coming over to bring you a present. No, this is more like be on the lookout. Jim's a little creepy. You see the difference? If Lisa's coming over, I'm like, oh what's Lisa, what's Lisa and Heather coming to bring me? If Jim's coming over, I'm like, oh what is Jim coming to bring me? You see the difference there? The connotation is very different. This word watch out literally means be on the look for, be on guard, be on the lookout in a negative connotation. And for what? For false prophets. What does the word false prophet literally mean? It means those who falsely claim to represent God. What is a prophet? Somebody who's supposed to represent and speak for God. What is false? The opposite of true. Put those two things together. We have to be on the guard. We have to be on the lookout for people who falsely claim to represent and speak for God. Not everybody who claims to represent Jesus really does. And then he goes further. Now let me give you a description of those people who claim to represent Jesus but really don't. They come to you in sheep's clothing, meaning they look like us. They might talk like us, right? Christianity sometimes gets a bad rap because we have like our own tribal knowledge or our own tribal vernacular. Did it ever occur to you that false Christians are fluent in christianese? That false prophets are fluent in church lingo, right? So they appear on the outside to look like us, talk like us. They can come into our small groups, come into our church services, sing on our worship team, be a part of our small group, whatever it is. But inwardly they are ferocious wolves. The character doesn't match the appearance. The inner character is to devour and attack. The outer appearance is somebody who gets along. This is the definition that Jesus gives for what a false prophet is. A false citizen is someone whose character doesn't match their appearance. 16. Now that I've defined what it is, by their fruit you will recognize them. So obviously Jesus is preaching in the first century. He's preaching to a largely agrarian audience. They know how to farm. They know how to grow sheep. They know that wolves eat sheep like all these analogies work. So what is fruit? Fruit is that which grows from the root, not the branch. Fruit starts way down deep at the root. That's where the nutrients come from. You see it on the branch, but it grows from the root. Just ask a simple question. How do you know an apple tree is an apple tree? Because there's apples on it. If somebody walked you to an apple tree and tried to convince you that it was an orange tree, how, I mean Scott, if Jim brought you in, it's like, here look at my new orange tree Scott. You're going to believe him? No, why? Because the evidence is there. But now let me ask you a question. If you didn't know the difference between an apple tree and an orange tree and there were no fruit on the branch, could he maybe deceive you? Maybe. And therein lies the problem. If we judge the tree by the branch and not the fruit, you miss the actual depth of what's meant to be there. The fruit grows all the way from the root. And then Jesus explains this through the rest of verse 16. Do people pick grapes from thorn bushes or figs from thistles? Two analogies, same thing. Grapes and figs, two fruits that they would have absolutely known and eaten and cultivated in their day. Thorns and thistles, two things that they would have absolutely known and not cultivated in their day. What's the difference? The figs and the grapes are sweet, enjoyable to eat good fruit. Thorns only cause pain. There's no nutritional benefit to thorns. There's no good benefit. Theologically, we could also argue thorns are a product of corruption in the fall. So there's nothing good in them whatsoever. So now Jesus is saying, by their fruit, you will recognize false prophets. By that which grows from the root of their character. Are they sweet? Do they bring nutrition? Do they bring benefit? Or do they just bring pain? And then 17, we keep going. Likewise. So likewise what? Likewise by the fact that you'll recognize false Christians by the fruit that their life produces and that the fruit that their life produces will either bring goodness or bring pain and strife. Likewise, every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit. How do you know an apple tree is an apple tree? It grows apples. That wasn't a trick question. How do you know an orange tree is an orange tree? It grows oranges. How do you know a lemon tree is a lemon tree? You're in South Florida. Super easy when I talk about trees. How do you know a Christian is a Christian? All of a sudden nobody wanted to say that one. The answer is because their character says so. It's real easy when I talk about apples and oranges. It gets a whole lot more personal when we got to start talking about ourselves. How do you know someone is a genuine citizen of Jesus's kingdom? Because their character shows their fruit, not their appearance. That's the difference between wolves and sheep's clothing, which by the way is an American cultural phrase that we use all the time that we borrowed from Jesus. When the appearance doesn't match the character, the fruit is nothing but thorns. There's nothing good to be had there. And now he says very simply, bad trees don't bear good fruit. Good trees don't bear bad fruit. Verse 18, a good tree cannot bear bad fruit and a bad tree cannot bear good fruit. 19, every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. Jesus is making a very exclusive and binary difference here. There are true citizens and there are false citizens. There are sheep and there are wolves. There are good trees. There are bad trees. There is life and there is destruction. Like I'm not making this up. I'm just reading the book, man. Like he just wrote it and I'm just trying to like say it in a good way. Jesus has laid up a very binary and exclusive argument. There are people who are genuinely citizens of the kingdom of Christ. Their character and their life bear the fruit as witness that they belong to him and that there are people who don't. And here's the hard part for us. Appearance doesn't count. I'm going to give you, many of you know me, you know I love like quoting little like fortune cookie style phrases. This one is a Melanie Yom's original, right? And she's looking to be like what? So when Melanie and I first got together, she had a phrase that I just thought was adorable and cute and so we've kept it. People are like bugs. You only really know what's inside when they're squished. Anybody wants to have a counseling session with Pastor Melanie when this is all over? No, but here's the reality. You can claim to have character all day long. Show me what you're like when you're stressed. Show me what you're like when you're under pressure. Show me what you're like when you're no longer controlling the mask that everybody else gets to see. In that moment, when the pressure is on and you have to make a choice, is it fruit or is it thorns? Because it's going to be one or the other. And that's when you really know what's growing at the root of your character. It's not just coming to church every Sunday morning and sitting in church and be like, oh, it's so wonderful. I'm going to raise my hands and worship and I'm going to use these Christian words when I come to church. I'm going to talk about the devotional email that I got in my inbox. No, the character that is inside. And here's the other thing. I love you. You can lie to me all day. I'm just a human being. You cannot lie to my boss. He sees you when no one else sees. He sees the depth of your character that no one else sees. You might have everyone else on this planet fooled and God still knows you're a hypocrite. I can't soften the exclusivity of this passage any more than necessary because I need you to feel the very tenuous difference here. Verse 20, thus by their fruit, you will recognize them. Who is the them of verse 20? It is false believers, not true believers. This whole passage has been about recognizing false prophets. Now, Rob, we could argue that in the positive side that Christians should bear good fruit. Absolutely. He said that we should be recognizable in other places. Jesus said, and this is how they know you're my disciples. If you love one another. So the idea is there, but the main focus of this passage from 15 to 20 is Jesus saying, this is how you will recognize those people who claim to represent me, but don't. Just to give you an example, many, many, many years ago when Mellie and I were in our first youth pastor position, we were invited. So many of you met my mother-in-law when she visits. My mother-in-law is a professional worship leader. She has done like big conferences and like stadiums and like lots and lots of people early on in our marriage. We had the privilege of being on my mother-in-law's worship team. Melanie sang and I played the guitar. And so here we are. And I forget which place it was. I'm sure you know the conference I'm thinking about. Was it, was it like actual Orange Dome in Orlando in Daytona? Right. So it was the Daytona stadium. There are 10,000 women in this women's conference and Melanie's in the line standing next to her mom. And I'm sitting back with the band and there are 10,000 women worshiping Jesus in this place. The sound was so gorgeous. But we're just the, you know, we're just the no name worship team, right? There was a person scheduled to lead worship later on that night, who was a very big deal at the time, very well-known name. No, I'm not going to tell you who it is because that defeats the purpose of the story. I'm not up here to throw shade at any individual. But this individual, their keyboard got lost by the airport when they were flying into town. I'm sure you can realize those of you are musicians, right? Kenzie, you all of a sudden get off the plane and the airline took your your guitar somewhere else. You are going to be an unhappy lady. I get that. This individual was so incensed that the airline could misplace his keyboard. His character leaked out in some really bad ways. And he literally demanded that if we could not find the same exact year, make and model of keyboard, that he refused to go on stage and do the job that he'd been hired for. Now, on the worship team that my mother-in-law had gathered were probably worship leaders from eight or 12 different churches. So literally all of us are calling back to our churches, getting the sound guy to go, send me a picture of the make and model of what's keyboards in our sanctuary. And praise God, we found one. Somebody drove under the unction of the Holy Spirit as quickly as legally as they could get it and got it to the stadium. We got it all hooked up. The individual led worship. Everybody thought he was amazing and nobody knew the difference except for the worship team. We saw that man's real character that nobody else saw. And I remember sitting there with my wife and I'm watching 10,000 women. He is on stage. He is like the deal, right? Like anybody would think that you've made it, bro. When you're invited to lead worship for 10,000 people, bro, you've made it. His character was so atrocious. I can never listen to him lead worship again, because that's all my ear can hear is the negative ilk in his voice because he was inconvenienced. That's the character that grows at the root. And I don't care how shiny your branches look. And I don't care how sharp your suit looks and how good your smile looks on a Sunday. It's when you're, again, people are like bugs. You want to know what's really inside, wait till they're squished. And when they're squished, that's where that real character comes out. Let her see in your notes. False citizens can be fluent in kingdom language and activity. This one hurts. So just buckle up and listen. Here we go. 21, not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord, will enter the kingdom of heaven. Stop. Just let that sit for a minute. This is Jesus himself speaking about his kingdom. And he says, listen, not everybody who says to me, Lord, Lord, will enter the kingdom of heaven. That word Lord literally means Lord, master, ruler, the one who has authority over me. That's what the Greek word kourios means, one who has authority over me. You can say it all day. It's just a word. Anybody can come to church and say, Lord Jesus, that doesn't mean Jesus is their Lord. Be very careful when you listen to somebody say Lord Jesus, because he might not actually be their Lord. He might just be fluent in our language and passing as one of our citizens, but not actually giving his heart and his life to the master. Now same thing happens in 22. Many will say to me on that day, Lord, Lord, and now he expands. Did we not prophesy in your name, drive out demons in and in your name, perform many miracles? As gently as I can say this acts of service for the kingdom do not purchase salvation. I don't care how many sermons you preach. I don't care how many, I mean, let's just use the example. I don't care how many times you have prophesied. I don't care how many times you have driven demons out of human beings. I don't care how many miracles you perform. You know why I don't care? Because the king doesn't care. The acts of service we perform for the kingdom will never purchase salvation given by the king. That can only be done by faith. That can only be done by submitting to his Lordship. That's why he first said, anybody who says Lord, Lord, you can call him Lord all day. Is he actually, you can claim to be a Christian all day. Is there real fruit in your life that you actually are or are you just a false citizen? You're in our midst, but you're not in our kin. Right? Use a southern term. You ain't kin with us. You ain't from around here. Verse 23, now Jesus replies to both of the groups. 21, the people who said Lord, Lord, verbal confirmation, but no real transformation. And then 22, and then 23, and then 24, and then 22, actual activity for the kingdom, but no real salvation. They both get the same response in verse 23. Then I will tell them plainly, bruh, I never knew you. Bruh, added. I want to take the two sentences here in two halves. The first is I never knew you. That sentence right there is the most terrifying sentence in scripture for me personally, because there's no sermon I can preach that's good enough to get me in the kingdom. There's no church I can lead that's good enough to get me in the kingdom. There's no amount of apologetics that I can teach my children that's good enough to get me into the kingdom, because no matter how much of those things I do and no matter how much of my life I give to the kingdom, Jesus might come back and say, but Bill, I never knew you. Great job. Get out. That's my sobering reality that I live with every day. At the end of the day, and here's why I say it that way. At the end of the day, a servant doesn't become a master. I'm always a servant. Why? Because he's always the master. Like there's never a moment in this relationship where I get an upgrade to anything better than servant, which means the best thing to do is the job they were asked to do. A servant can't be better than the role that they were given. Why? Because the master defined the role. So I can't ever do anything better than what God has given me to do, but I could do all of it and still not be known. Notice the way the verb is here. I never knew you. Jesus is not asking how good you think you know him. What I'm asking you is does Jesus know you, not you know him? Those are two very different questions. Then Jesus himself goes a step further after the I never knew you statement. Away from me, you evildoers. Wait a minute. These are people who just verbally called Jesus Lord. These are people who cast out demons in his name, who prophesied in his name, who preached in his name, who led worship in his name, who led small groups in his name, who went on mission trips in his name, who gave money in his name, and Jesus calls all of that evil without the relationship at the root of the tree. All of this kingdom activity that we do ends up being trash, ends up being like roasted dog water if Jesus is not at the root of why we do it. And this is where that kingdom DNA principle really has to meet the rubber, has to meet the road. The two-fold test of kingdom citizenship, this is my take on it. If you wanted me to abbreviate all that I just said into this, the two-fold test of kingdom citizenship is character and activity. Don't just give me your activity. I need to know that that activity is driven out of the right kind of character because I guarantee you there are people all over this country and all over the world who are standing in this place right now doing my job for the sake of the attention of other human beings. There are people who are doing this job or that job or those jobs that are back there that you don't see for the sake of being paid, for the sake of Instagram followers, for the sake of respect, for the sake of book sales. If we don't do this job for the sake of the kingdom, it's evil. Wow, that kind of sucks. Like Ethan, doesn't matter how good I do at this, if I don't do it for the right reason, it's all trash, right? No matter how many sermons I preach, no matter how many songs we lead, no matter how many books I can write or classes I can teach, if I don't put Jesus at the root of why I do all of those things, it's all evil doing. It's all just garbage. Wow. Is your kingdom vocabulary and your kingdom activity outpacing your kingdom relationship? I have to admit in my life sometimes, yes. Especially after finishing the last season of school. I think my activity has absolutely outpaced my relationship in several areas. Having time for prayer is a big one. Got to admit that. I can't stand up here and be a hypocrite and not say that this stings to teach probably more than it stings to hear because I have to stand up here and say the things that I full well know, Rob, I'm not a good example of, but I can't back down from what the word says or then I'm a bad teacher. Could your kingdom activity be your substitute for actually knowing Jesus, for actually loving him, for actually spending time with him, not spending time serving him, not spending time doing the things that his kingdom does. We should do those things, but is the activity replacing the relationship? That's like taking fruit from a different tree and duct taping it to the branch so you can call it an apple tree. The tree didn't, that fruit didn't grow on that tree. You transplanted it. You put it there. You borrowed, let's see, that was Casey's mic, right? Because she's shorter than everybody else, right? I'm going to borrow some of Casey's fruit. I'm going to borrow some of Megan's fruit. I'm going to borrow some of Mel's fruit. I'm going to borrow some of Rob's fruit and I'm going to put them all on my tree and look how fruitful I am, bro. You didn't grow none of that. Or to make it a little bit more personal, I'm going to borrow this sermon point that I saw on Instagram two weeks ago. I'm going to borrow this sermon point from, we just went and saw Joshua at Sight and Sound, beautiful show by the way, wonderful. I'm supposed to be teaching the book of Joshua in two weeks. Now I got a real temptation. How much of the show am I going to borrow or am I going to write this? Am I going to write the sermon the way the text tells me to write it? Right. There was a, okay, another quick story. This was a couple of years ago. We're driving around with my mother-in-law and she's quoting back to me a sermon that her pastor had told. And there was a joke in the sermon that my mother-in-law found very humorous and thought that I would also find very humorous. So I believe I'm in the back seat. You're in the passenger seat. Mom's in the front, mom's driving and she's telling me about this cool sermon that her pastor just preached and she lays up the joke and I fire back the punchline. And she goes, Bill, how did you know that? I said, because that was Craig Groshell's sermon from three weeks ago. I heard it on his podcast. The pastor of that church bought the transcript and just read it to his congregation. No studying, no prep. Didn't even swap out the jokes or the personal stories. Just read another man's work to his church as if it was his own sermon. Man, that really got under my skin. I got to be careful not to do those things and substitute the activity that I prepare for you. Letter D, false citizenship is exposed in crisis and confirmed in eternity. This is 24 through 27 is where Jesus really brings it in. If you haven't felt slapped in the face, hold on, I'm coming. Therefore, everyone who hears these words of mine, meaning all that Jesus has taught, this is a summation of the entire sermon on the mount. Therefore, everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock. So many times we use this rock and sand passage, but we don't link it to the rest of the sermon. The kingdom DNA driving our character, which then moves our activity. But why does he choose this analogy? Let me read 24 and 25 together. Therefore, everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock. The rain came down, the streams rose, the winds blew against that house, yet it did not fail because it had its foundation on the rock. Jesus here changes from the negative example of false citizenship to a positive application of real kingdom citizenship. And he explains that the wise man chose the right foundation. The house is an example of one's life. So now we're talking about positive kingdom citizenship. Wisdom is understanding the right foundation. The house is the example of my life. Then we talk about the rain, the stream, the wind. These are natural events in creation. Also understand the area that they live that Jesus taught. There's a lot of sand. Storms could come. Flash floods would overflow banks. This is a normal everyday occurrence in that area of the world. We are somewhat insulated from that living here where we have storm drains and sewer systems. Although I have to tell you, Pastor Tyler texted me this morning. He did not make it to church because he woke up in his basement was flooded. So he had to handle his family. I said, Roger, bro, we got you. Mr. John stepped in, taught the youth class this morning, and that's how we work as a team. But the idea that life storms don't happen even today is very false. So natural events that occur, the foundation on the rock, why is that important? Because flowing water doesn't change the rock. It flows around it. However, here's the opposite example. 26, but everyone who hears these words of mine and does not put them into practice is like a foolish man who built his house on sand. 27, the rain came down, the streams rose, the wind blew and beat against that house, and it fell with a great crash. So Jesus saying it is totally possible to hear all that Jesus taught and still not win. It comes down to the simple fact that you have to hear these words of Jesus and actually put them into practice. The reason the on sand is dangerous is because desert flash floods can relocate large amounts of sand very easily. If your house was built on a sand dune and the river overflowed its banks, the river would eat away at the sand and your whole house would come crashing down. Your house was built on a rock, the river would flow right around its foundation and you would be unscathed. That's the example set in his time, in his words. I do want to make a point about the difference between the storms, which are the cause, and the crash, which is the outcome. Remember at the very beginning Jesus talked about the gates. He talked about the fact that this life directly leads to an end result. I believe the end crash is the end result of the lifestyle. The ultimate flood, quote unquote, that tests the house, quote unquote, will be the final judgment in eternity. But there are smaller storms that reveal that difference today. The small, the way we handle the storms of life today are supposed to help reveal which foundation our life is on so that we don't experience that big final crash in eternity when your actual citizenship will be revealed. Right now you can claim to be a citizen of the kingdom and you can be lying about it. You cannot do that when you stand face to face with the king of kings and lord of lords because he has the record of who are his citizens and who is not. I don't have that. I can't claim to know that. That's why when somebody says, well, you think so and so is a Christian, I can never answer yes or no. My only answer is what is their lifestyle say? Is there fruit? Also, are they a brand new recent convert to Christianity? Like, were they a pre-Christian yesterday? Because then maybe we ought to have some grace that the process of growing to be like Christ takes time versus were they a pre-Christian 20 years ago? And for the last 20 years they've remained a spiritual toddler because nobody told them they had to grow and mature and so they still act like a toddler 20 years later? Also totally possible. Think of a storm that you have weathered recently in your life. Whether that be an emotional storm, a family storm, a work storm, a financial storm. What did that storm reveal about the foundation in your life? Did you scramble? Did it knock you off your feet? Did your life get kiltered? Or did you stay grounded? Now here's the thing about staying grounded. It doesn't mean the storm goes away. It doesn't make the wind any less. It doesn't make the lightning or the thunder any quieter. It just gives you security in the midst that the storm still rages. So don't think about the storm and go, oh, because the storm was really bad I must not be on solid ground. No, the storm is really bad for both people. The difference is the outcome of what the storm produces. For the person who's on a solid foundation, we endure and we remain. The person on a weak foundation, they don't endure and may not remain. You might be able to scramble and put some two by fours together and fix that side of your house before it falls over, but the fact that you had to scramble means you're not on solid ground. Does that make sense to everybody? Then we get to letter E's. We bring it in. True kingdom authority is recognizable when he speaks. Verse 28, when Jesus had finished saying these things, the crowd were amazed at his teaching because he taught as one who had authority and not as the teachers of their law. Matthew is number one, reminding us that this entire sermon are the words of Jesus and that the crowds received the words of the king differently than they heard the words of all of the religious teachers of their day. And the reason is, and I'm going to put this into the new international bill version. Here it is. When the king speaks, it hits different. When Jesus speaks, he speaks as the one who possesses the authority. False citizens, remember this is all about false citizenship, false citizens claim authority that they don't actually possess. And I have to say, I think there are many people who do what I do for a living, who try to claim an authority they do not actually possess. So let me be very clear. I do not believe that I possess any authority in your life. I'm your pastor. Now, some people would say, well, does that mean you have authority over the church? No, he has authority over the church. His word has authority over the church. Jim, Bill and I have responsibility for the church. That's different. Jim and Bill and I serve you as the elders of this church in a responsibility to the king, not in an authority over his people. That's why the term under shepherd. If you're new to Christianity, I'm going to teach you a new Christian vernacular term. It's called under shepherd. Why do we call it under shepherd? Because the sheep only have one shepherd and that's Jesus. And under him, we are all equal. We are all shepherds in his flock. I possess no authority in your life other than the relational authority that you choose to grant me. If Rob, you call me up and you're like, hey, pastor, I need some advice. You're granting me relational right to speak advice. But do you notice that when Rob calls me and asks me for advice, I still possess no authority to make him follow my advice. Here's the hint. That's the most frustrating part of being a pastor. You can ask me for my advice of which I would willingly give it to you. But when we click off that phone call, I possess no spiritual authority to make Rob obey that advice. I possess no spiritual authority to punish him if he doesn't obey that advice or reward him if he does obey that advice. See, false teachers will attempt to claim an authority that only belongs to the king. As his representative, I don't actually get his authority. You know what I get? I get responsibility to answer to him. I get the authority to do the job I've been given, but you're not actually my sheep. So I want to say another thing out loud because many people hear me say catalyst is my church. When I use the word my and I describe you as my church, I am not using my in the possessive sense of the term. Ray, you don't belong to me. You belong to Jesus and you always have. But your care is my responsibility. So when I say my church, I do not mean that somehow I possess something of you. No, what I possess is responsibility for you, not ownership of you. I did not die for your sins. Paul makes this super clear. Were you baptized in the name of Paul or Apollos? No, there's only one king. He's in charge of everybody. But Bill and Jim and myself have been selected by the Holy Spirit and elected by you, the members of this church to serve in the role of elder, in the role of leader. But in the same way that the crowd could hear the words of the king hit different than the words of our human teachers. Please do not ever, ever, ever, ever think that because someone is a pastor that they could get it right. Only Jesus is right. All the time, every day, all day. Only Jesus is right. Which is why whether it's me or any other pastor, especially if you're watching online, this is your first Sunday. Sorry, this is just me. Like this is just who I am. Never believe any pastor. Always check the word. Always check the text because the moment I diverge from the text, I have diverted from the real source of authority and now I'm standing in my source of opinion. And my opinion just doesn't matter. Ask my children. They'll tell you. The reason the crowd knew Jesus's words hit different is only the king can speak with kingdom authority. I can represent his authority. I can attempt to do the best job possible at explaining his words to you, his people. But none of the job that stands at this beautifully redone piece of wood. Thank you, Mr. Phil. None of this job possesses authority. It represents authority. That's super important when you realize the false teachers that Jesus were standing against. They love to stand on the street corners and be respected by them. They love to tell people what to do. They love to show themselves as holy. Why? Because the root was built in pride and egotism and selfishness and the root was human. It wasn't godly and the fruit that comes out of it was thorns. It wasn't figs. It wasn't sweet. What is the difference between representing Jesus and replacing him? And where does that line get blurry in each and every one of our lives? I need to represent him, but I should never be replacing him. Jesus shows up right now. Bro, I'm sitting down. There's no point in me doing my job for another day once he comes back. I have a job until he comes back. After that, then he will reassign me as he sees fit because he's the king and I'm not. So let me bring this to here's your takeaway as I bring this in and Mel, you can start sending me whatever questions we have for today. Here's your takeaway. Kingdom citizens live and act differently because they answer to a different king. I realize that's almost an overly simplistic summation, but that's where we got to stop. Kingdom citizens live and act differently because they answer to a different king. I started my sermon today by being thankful for the men and women who have served our country and given their lives for our freedom, but I don't live for them. The freedom they have granted me, I use for him. I don't live for our American political system. I live for him. And like, big secret, God doesn't need America to fix his problems. He's the creator of the universe. Now, my wife will retort back at me and she goes, but you don't know that America is not part of his plan, right? God used Persia. God used Babylon. God used Assyria. Yep. And then he threw all of them away when he was done because none of them were his kingdom. America is not the throne of Jesus Christ. It is the next empire in a series of empires to get us back to the true kingdom. As kingdom citizens, we have to live his kingdom citizenship in our local imperial context. The first century Christians had to live for Jesus under the Romans. In the, what, the eight, eight hundreds to a thousand Christians had to live under the Ottoman empire. Then right before the American revolution, Christians had to live under the expanse of the British empire, where the sun never set on the British empire. Now we as Christians need to live as kingdom citizens in the American empire and get the difference. Kingdom citizenship is the DNA of who I am. American imperialism is where I had the privilege of being born. I do believe it was, I'm privileged to be a citizen of this country, but the privilege of being American way pales in comparison to the privilege of being Christian. That kingdom is eternal. That kingdom will exist when all other earthly kingdoms fade away. And that's the purpose of kingdom citizens live and act differently because they answer to a different king.
