# Transcript: Joshua   Ch1   Victory Through Obedience
Date: 2026-06-08

---

Well good morning. Welcome to Catalyst. I'm Dr. Bill. Thank you so much for being here and being a part of our church family. For all of you, join us online, whether you are watching before or after the fact, whether you are in our live chat or you're just watching on your device. Thank you for being a part of the extended Catalyst family. As you saw in the video intro, today we are going to begin a new teaching series in the book of Joshua. So this is your first Sunday joining us for worship. You picked a great Sunday because this is the beginning of a new multi-week teaching series. I try very hard when we plan the annual teaching calendar and what are we going to study as a church to make sure that we study from different parts of scripture. We study from the New Testament. We study from the Old Testament. We study people. We also study theology and doctrine and topics. It's important to make sure we have a well-rounded meal when it comes to the Bible. The key thought that's going to hold all of the messages in this Joshua series together is this. God's promises never expire. They are received by walking in faithful obedience. God's promises never expire. You can always count God's good for it. His word is good for it. However, just because God promises something does not take us off the hook for needing to have faithful obedience. I think that's one of the real true themes from the book of Joshua is God's faithfulness in the midst of human faithful obedience. Now because we're in the book of Joshua and it's fairly early in the Bible, we're going to do an abbreviated big Bible story because as you can see we have the baptismal tank out today and we have several baptisms to celebrate. Too far in the weeds, so let's do the short version. If this is your first Sunday with catalyst, this is an interactive part. I'm going to say a sentence to leave a blank. The church is going to yell out the answer in the blank. Feel free to yell as loud as you like. Let's play the let's play along. In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth. Onto the earth, he planted a garden at a place called Eden. Into Eden, he placed two original human beings, Adam and Eve. Adam and Eve willfully disobey, bringing corruption into the world and are kicked out of the garden. That corruption grows all the way to the point of Genesis chapter 9. When God is upset that he made mankind, he decides to send a flood and he chooses a man to build an ark to save humanity from the flood. That man's name is Noah. After the the flood narrative, the ark lands, the waters recede, humanity restarts. God chooses a man from Mesopotamia, makes a special covenant, makes a special arrangement with him. I will be your God. You will be my people. I will bless those who bless you. I will curse those who curse you. Your descendants will be a blessing to the whole world and I'm going to give you this bit of land from here to here, here to here. That man's name by God is then changed to Abraham and that's why we call that the Abrahamic covenant. God made a covenant with Abraham that there would be a nation that came from him. They would be his representative nation. They would serve him. They would be devoted to him and they would also receive a specific plot of land that's measured in north, south, east, and west. Then God repeats that promise to Abraham's second-born son whose name is Isaac. God repeats the promise again to Isaac's second-born son whose name is Jacob. So Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the three patriarchs of the Jewish religion in the Old Testament, they all hear the same promise from God. Then Jacob has a lot of sons. Jacob's sons become the 12 tribes of Israel and they sell their second youngest brother into slavery. So this is the end of the book of Genesis. They sell their second youngest brother into slavery in Egypt. He goes into Egypt as a slave 13 to 17 something years later. He is then second in charge of all of Egypt. That young man's name is Joseph. That's the and that's just the book of Genesis. There's a lot that happens there. Then Joseph saves his family and his people from the famine. They move into Egypt into the land of Goshen. There we go. Into the land of Goshen. They live there protected by Egypt and their military power, their economic power, and God begins to bless his people. They begin to multiply. Then comes a pharaoh or a king who forgot that God worked through Joseph. They enslaved the Hebrew people. They call out for a deliverer and God chooses a guy who's born as a slave, raised in the palace, spent 40 years watching sheep in a place called Midian, and sends him back to Egypt to be the deliverer of God's people. That man's name is Moses. Moses then goes and with his older brother named Aaron and their sister named Miriam. So Moses, Aaron, Miriam. Moses goes back says to Pharaoh, let my people go. Pharaoh decides not to do that. That's bad for you. It's not very healthy. Then I'll do what God wants. And so God then brings the 10 plagues of Egypt, ultimately rescuing his people, brings them to the edge of a body of water. The Egyptian army is coming behind them. The water's in front of them. Moses takes the staff. He puts it in the water. God causes a large east wind to blow, separates the water. God's people walk across on dry ground. The name of that body of water is the Red Sea. They cross the Red Sea on dry ground. God causes the water to crash back over the Egyptian army, thereby saving his people and bringing them to the land that he had promised all the way back at Abraham. And he comes to the foot of a very particular mountain. Moses and Joshua go up the mountain. Moses receives the law from God, comes back down the mountain to tell God's people this is how we're supposed to live with God. Unfortunately, they didn't do right and they're actually worshiping a false idol when Moses comes to bring them the law. The name of the mountain on which Moses received the law is Mount Sinai. That's why that's called the Sinatic Covenant. Moses ultimately breaks those first two tablets and Israel has to wander in the wilderness for 40 years. The entire adult generation that experienced the 10 plagues of Egypt and walks across the dry ground dies except for two people. And this is the part of the Bible we're at now. Two people from the generation that experienced the miracles in Egypt that walked across the Red Sea on dry ground. Two people get to cross into the Promised Land. Caleb and his brother Joshua. Why are they the only two? Because they were supposed to go right to the Promised Land after Egypt. That was the plan. For those of you who are old enough, that's what MapQuest said. They're on their way to the Promised Land. But because of the disobedience at Mount Sinai, they end up having to wander in the wilderness for 40 years. But when they were going in in the first place, Moses sent in 12 spies. Joshua and his brother Caleb were among them. They said, no, God has given us this land. We can handle whatever's there. The other 10 spies chickened out and that's why that nation, that generation had to die away. So then as Moses is getting to be quite old, God chooses a new leader to lead his people into the Promised Land after the 40-year wilderness wandering. And the name of the young man selected to take over leadership after Moses is Joshua. The same name of the book that we're going to start studying for the next two months. His name was Joshua. He was the leader of the nation of Israel after the 40-year wilderness wandering, which is after the story of the Exodus, which is after they moved into Egypt at the end of Genesis. That's how the first six books of the Bible connect into one solid narrative. Now the key thought again, God's promises never expire. They are received by walking in faithful obedience. Now you have the setting. We are going to read from Joshua chapter one verses one through 18. The easiest way to read along with the sermon today, if you happen to have your phone, is to use the Catalyst app. If you have the Catalyst app, you can also go to catalyst302.com slash app. If you're in our live chat, our chat host can drop you a link there. If you go into the Catalyst app and you scroll down, there's a box that says sermon notes. If you open that up, it's not just going to have the text. It's going to have all of my notes. It has a way to put in your own notes as you follow along. And that is where our question form is. So if you want to ask any questions this morning, you can use the link right in the sermon notes to ask a question. And I will do live Q&A at the end of the teaching. So we'll also have the text for you here on the screen, but just want to say the app is a whole lot more interactive as far as the sermon notes go. So here we go. Let's read Joshua chapter one verses one through 18. We'll read it as one section, then we'll go back, chop it up, and walk through it. Joshua chapter one verse one. After the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, the Lord said to Joshua, son of Nun, Moses's aid, Moses, my servant is dead. Now then, you and all these people get ready to cross the Jordan River into the land I am about to give to them, to the Israelites. I will give you every place where you set your foot, as I promised Moses. Your territory will extend from the desert to Lebanon, and from the great river, the Euphrates, all the Hittite country, to the Mediterranean Sea in the west. No one will be able to stand against you all the days of your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with you. I will never leave you nor forsake you. Be strong and courageous, because you will lead these people to inherit the land I swore to their ancestors to give them. Be strong and very courageous. Be careful to obey all the law my servant Moses gave you. Do not turn from it to the right or to the left that you may be successful wherever you go. Keep this book of the law always on your lips. Meditate on it day and night so that you may be careful to do everything written in it. Then you will be prosperous and successful. Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid. Do not be discouraged, for the Lord your God will be with you wherever you go. Verse 10. So Joshua ordered the officers of the people, go through the camp and tell the people, get your provisions ready. Three days from now you will cross the Jordan here to go in and take possession of the land the Lord your God is giving you for your own. But to the Rubinites, the Gadites, the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua said, remember the command Moses, servant of the Lord gave you after he said, the Lord your God will give you rest by giving you this land. Your wives, your children, and your livestock may stay in the land that Moses gave you east of the Jordan. But all your fighting men ready for battle must cross over ahead of your fellow Israelites. You are to help them until the Lord gives them rest as he has done for you. And until they too have taken possession of the land the Lord your God is giving them. After that you may go back and occupy your own land which Moses the servant of the Lord gave you east of the Jordan towards the sunrise. So they answered Joshua, whatever you've commanded us we will do and whatever you said or wherever you send us we will go. Just as we fully obeyed Moses so we will obey you. Only may the Lord your God be with you as he was with Moses. Whoever rebels against your word and does not obey it, whatever you may command them will be put to death. Only be strong and courageous. So that's Joshua chapter one. Let's go back to the beginning. The first point I want to make, you can see this in your sermon notes, is godly leadership operates within covenant. So godly leadership operates within covenant. Let me show you what I mean. Verse one, after the death of Moses the Lord, stop, you notice that the word Lord there is in all capital letters. What does it mean anytime you see lord l-o-r-d all capital letters? Yahweh, the covenant name for God. So the book of Joshua is opening and he's saying after the death of Moses, that connects us to the Exodus story which connects us to Genesis, after the death of Moses the servant of the Yahweh, the servant of Yahweh, the servant of the Lord, the covenant God of Israel. The Lord, covenant name again, said to Joshua son of Nun, Moses's aid, verse two, Moses my servant is dead. Now then, you and all these people get ready to cross the Jordan. Everything that happens in the book of Joshua happens within the context of the Abrahamic covenant. I need you to understand that going in. There's a lot of moral questions that we will have to ponder as we get into this book. I'm not afraid of them. We need to ask good questions. We should think deeply and live authentically about our faith. Absolutely. But you need to understand going in at verse one. This is a covenant book. God made a covenant promise. God is now making his promise good for his people. The IOU that was issued to Abraham in Genesis chapter 12, in Genesis chapter 15, in Genesis chapter 17 is now being made due and being delivered here in Joshua chapter one. Moses my servant is dead. There are times when following God and seasons change. I'm not going to overstress that point because we talked about it last week when we talked about our graduates and how season change is real. We looked at Deuteronomy 31 which is really that moment where the Moses to Joshua handover took place. Now we're seeing Joshua actually begin to follow God. You and all these people get ready to cross the Jordan River into the land that I am about to give them. The other thing I need to understand about the book of Joshua, the Israelites are not taking the land. That's the wrong reading. That's the wrong interpretation. The Israelites are not taking the land. They are receiving the land. Though the action may look the same on the human side, the action is very different on the God's side. If we were to say Joshua and Israel took the land, then their ownership of the land would be due to their own power and might, their own ability to defeat their military opposition. That is not the book of Joshua. Just look at verse two. Moses my servant is dead. Okay new season. Now then, sometimes new season requires new action. You and all these people who is the covenant applied to? The entire nation. Get ready to cross the Jordan River into the land I am about to give to them. Who is the active participant or the active agent who is giving the land to Israel? God. This is pivotal to understanding the book of Joshua correctly. This is not a book about genocide. This is not a book about just war though those topics come up. That is not what the book is about. What the book is about is inheritance. The book is about inheriting a promise that was made hundreds of years ago that has now come due. I am about to give it to them. Here's the other thing I need to understand. If you read the book of Joshua and you read it and you're like, God gave Israel the promised land so God will give me, fill in the blank. You are misappropriating the book. The Old Testament covenant was given to a corporate body not an individual. Joshua himself does not own all the promised land. Moses did not own all the promised land. Who owns the land? God. Who is assigning the land to its caretakers? God. Who is the recipient or the inheritor? The nation of Israel. And if you go and look at the laws in the nation of Israel in the Old Testament, it was every seven sevens, every 49 years they had the year Jubilee where all debts are canceled. All land goes back to its original family inheritor. Why? Because the land was the promise from God. It wasn't won by military might. So that whole be strong and courageous. We're going to get into it. But I need you to understand as the book opens, this is all about covenant. This is all about God. Verse 3, I will give you every place where you set your foot as I promised Moses. God's faithfulness flows from his nature not from our performance. God is faithful even when we're not. How do I know that? Because God just promised to be with Joshua as he was with Moses. But the whole reason Moses is not entering the promised land is Moses was disobedient during the 40-year wilderness wandering. If you're not familiar with the story, it's in the book of Numbers. God tells Moses to speak to a rock so that water will flow out of it. Moses is irritated with God's people. He's frustrated that with the sheep that he has to follow. Jim, I have no idea what that ever feels like. But he strikes the rock instead of speaks to the rock in direct disobedience to what God says. And Moses is not allowed to enter the promised land. God's faithfulness flows out of his nature. It is not response to our performance. Verse 4, your territory will extend from the desert to Lebanon, from the great river the Euphrates, the all the Hittite country to the Mediterranean Sea in the west. That matches very clearly. If you go back to Genesis chapter 15, that's when the land was promised. It's being received here, but it was promised back in Genesis 15. The land is connected to the covenant. Super important going in. The land is connected to the covenant. God made an everlasting eternal covenant with Old Testament Israel that said, this land belongs to you. Before you ask the question, I will go ahead and answer it. Do I, as the pastor, believe that this promise is still valid today? Yes. Unapologetically, yes. Do I believe that the nation state that exists as Israel in the Middle East today is the same exact nation state as Old Testament Israel? No. That doesn't mean there aren't people living in Israel who aren't actual descendants of Abraham, right? But just because we rebuilt a nation state doesn't mean that everyone in that nation, for instance, there are Muslims who live in Israel today who would not be direct descendants of Abraham. There are Jews who maybe may not be. There are also atheists and secular Jews who live in the current nation state of Israel. So when we get into the Israel and geopolitics, I don't want to just all of a sudden blanket say that if it's got the word Israel on it, you can import every single Old Testament covenant. No, that's why we have to be super clear. Does the land still belong to the people who God gave it? Yes. But was the land supposed to be received through faithful obedience? Yes. And open a lots of cans of worms to see which people take the bait and ask tough questions. Here we go. Verse five, no one will be able to stand against you all the days of your life as I was with Moses. So I will be with you. I will never leave you nor forsake you. This is the gas up moment for Joshua. Joshua was about to have to take over from Moses. Moses is a monolithic figure, one of the most celebrated figures of the Old Testament. I mean, homie parted the Red Sea with God's power. Joshua walked across it. Joshua also was in the original incursion in the promised land. Joshua also spent 40 years in the wilderness wandering for the failures of the rest of his spies. Joshua understands the weight of leadership, the cost of bad character and failure. And now Joshua is receiving the mantle to lead the nation of Israel. And verse five to me is like the gas up moment. God's like, yo, I got you. It's the new international bill version. As I was with Moses, so I will be with you. I will never leave you. I will never say, yo, I got you. That's the big dab up moment from God. Joshua gets to take over leadership. He gets the promise of God's faithfulness because God is faithful because of his character. God's not faithful to Joshua just because Joshua was a good guy. Because then that would lead us to believe that if I ever made a failure, I made a mistake, that God doesn't love me anymore. And that's not true. That's not the character of the God of the Bible. So how do I make this first piece make sense? Do we live in the Old Testament covenant today? No, we do not. We do not live in the Old Covenant because of Jesus who came, who died, who rose again. We live under the new covenant, the terms in which the relationship we get to have with God is different than the relationship they had in the Old Testament. So then somebody's going to say, well, then, pastor, why do we bother reading the Old Testament? Because it's the word of God, because it's true, because if you don't understand, I'll say this, the more you understand about the Old Testament, the more you get out of the New Testament. The more you understand God's character, the more you see how he operated in the Old Testament and in the New Testament. But I will tell you, it's like just super simple, right? I believe that when God makes a promise, he's good for it. I believe when God says, Jen, I'm gonna do this, that means God gonna do that. Like that's the theological version. I'm gonna do this, he gonna do that. This is why it's important to study the Old Testament and see how God treated his people. Also, the leadership angle still tracks for us today. Where are you leading in your life and are you leading from God's Word or your own instincts? Joshua now has to step into a place where he has to lead all of the nation of Israel in saying, this is what God is telling us to do. Husbands and fathers, that's your job, lead your families. Mothers, that's your job, lead your children. The idea that leadership doesn't apply to us today is false. It still very much does. Some of you hold leadership positions at work. Some of you have leadership positions in school or in your family units, in your friend units. The idea that there's nothing to get from the book of Joshua just doesn't track. The better question is, what would your leadership be like if it was more like God's covenant than your own expectations? So, godly leadership starts in covenant. Here's point two. Obedience is how covenant victory is received. Obedience is how covenant victory is received. Look at verse six. Be strong and courageous because, be strong and courageous, hearkens back to Deuteronomy 31. We looked at that last week. Be strong and courageous because you will lead these people to inherit the land I swore to their ancestors to give. So, in the covenant from Abraham, in the frame of Deuteronomy 31, now God is issuing Joshua's responsibility. Leadership, not military power and overtake. That's the wrong angle for the book of Joshua. Here in verse six he says, you will lead these people, you Joshua, will lead these people, my nation, the nation of Israel, to do something specific, to inherit the land I swore to their ancestors to give them. Remember that Joshua lived through the entire 40-year wilderness wandering. The last 40 years of his life were a drudgery through the desert because of failure of disobedience. June, who better to pick to lead the nation of Israel than somebody who just lived 40 years of failure. 40 years. I mean, like I don't really need to make anybody feel old but if you're older than 40, subtract 40 from your age and think about what your life was like then. That's how long Joshua had to wait to receive the promise. 40 years because of the failure of the previous generation. Verse seven, the phrase is be strong and very courageous. That's a very key theme in the book of Joshua. It's repeated. Be careful to obey all the law my servant Moses gave you and do not turn to or do not turn from it to the right or to the left that you may be successful where you go. Highlight, underline, long press, scratch it, do something. Verse seven is one of the key verses to understanding the book of Joshua. Verse six and seven if you put them together. The land is an inheritance because it was promised all the way back to Abraham. They should have gotten it when Moses led but their disobedience led to 40 years of wilderness wandering and now Joshua is leading God's people into their inheritance. It's already been given. They're just receiving it. We have the same thing happen today when somebody passes away and their will is read and the inheritance. Well, the inheritance was defined when the will was written, right? My parents are still very much alive. They were here at church this past Sunday. They're probably watching online. My parents are still with me. I know because my parents have told me that their wills have been written. I don't have it but I know my parents were. They're good for it. If my parents say they've already decided what their will, what's gonna be in their will, I trust and believe they have. Did they ask for my vote what's in the will? No. But is the will not already written and decided? Yes. Have I received what's in the will yet? No. But does that not make the decision still very real but not materialized? Yes. Same thing. God promised the land in Genesis 12 and 15. The time between the promise and the reception doesn't mean the will is not good for it. That's guaranteed. Here, be strong and very courageous. What is the terms by which Israel receives the land? Be careful to obey the law for my servant Moses. Do not, I love this, do not turn to it from the right or to the left. What I love about that verse is it reminds me that there's more than one way to do something wrong. Like ADHD, Dr. Bill. I get it. Right Mike, come on. There's more than one way to do it wrong. There's one way to do it right. You can get it wrong going this way, get wrong going that way. You can get it wrong going up, going down. Be careful that word literally means to watch out, to be on guard, to watch over in a protective sense. Like a like a hen guarding her chicks. Be careful, watch over, guard. Guard what? Guard your ability to obey. Why? Because it's your ability to obey that will give you success. God directly tied the success of the reception of their inheritance from him to their obedience to his word. That's where we're at. Verse 8. Keep this book of the law always on your lips. Meditate on it day and night so that you may be careful to obey everything written in it. Then you will be prosperous and successful. The book of the law at this point in biblical history is most likely the first five books of the Bible. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers. What's last one? Deuteronomy. Just make sure everybody's awake. Because the story of Joshua is playing out in real time right now. So Joshua hasn't been fully written yet. Joshua is experiencing Joshua. But they had the first five books of the Bible. That's the book of the law. The complete amount of scripture they had at that moment is what they were supposed to be careful and and I like the word keep in verse 8 because it literally means to do and to continue doing. Not just oh yeah keep it one time. Like put it like your Polly pocket in your pocket and just keep it there. No, it's to do it and continue to do it. Continue to meditate. Think about the word. Continue to keep it on your lips. To have it be both the inner and the outward working of your personality. Why? Because verse 8 then you will be prosperous and successful. This is echoed in the New Testament book of Romans when Paul says in Romans 12 2, do not conform to the pattern of this world but be transformed by what? By the renewing of your mind. Then you will be able to test and approve what God's will is. His good pleasing and perfect will. Paul echoes the same sentiment. When you center your mind and your thoughts and your speech and your inner and outer person on scripture then you are in the right place to be successful and receive the inheritance from God. Have I not commanded you be strong and courageous? There it is again. Do not be afraid. Do not be discouraged for the Lord your God will be with you wherever you go. Just because Joshua was promised the promised land does not mean there wasn't fear in receiving it. Just because Joshua was promised that the land was going to belong to Israel does not mean there's not discouragement along the way. Just because you are following Jesus does not mean your life is rosy and rainbows all day. There's like one person that amen that was the amen right? Y'all must have really great lives. Like nobody wants to amen the life could suck moment. It can. Following Jesus is not always comfortable or easy. Having good character is not always smooth. There are real moments when following God comes up to fear. There are real moments when following God comes up to discouragement. Please please please hear me. You get nothing else out of the sermon. Hear this. Do not use fear and discouragement as the measurement of whether you're where God wants you to be because sometimes you have to push through the fear to get where he wants you to go. Sometimes you have to push past the discouragement. That's just along the journey it's not the destination. Following God in this moment was promised hundreds of years ago. How do I bring that forward to today? You and I also live in a covenant. We live in a covenant secured by the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. You and I also have a future inheritance land. It is the earthly kingdom and then the eternal kingdom of Christ. Both of those are in the they exist but not received yet category. So like Old Testament Israel you and I have a covenant. You and I have a promise and you and I have an inheritance that we don't have yet. That doesn't stop life from being difficult. That doesn't stop pain and sadness and mourning and frustration and drivers who can't figure out how to use turn signals and people who break too slowly on the highway right? Doesn't stop any of that from happening. Just because I have a Savior and I have a King and I have an inheritance doesn't mean life is easy. That's why faithful obedience is important. Does your relationship with God drown out fear and discouragement or do they drown out the voice of God in your life? Do you give too much bandwidth? Do you give too much airspace? Too much rental space in your head to those voices of fear and discouragement and doubt and lack and not good enough? Or does your meditation on the Word of God? Does the time you spend in prayer? Does the time you spend talking to your family and your friends about the Word of God? When those voices of fear and discouragement come up, is God drowning them out or are they drowning him? That's going to be different for every one of you. But I can tell you this. If you are following Jesus, I will promise you two important things. Number one, there is an inheritance that awaits every one of us that cannot be taken away. Number two, the journey is still tough. It's not all sunshine and roses. I wish I could tell you that was, but I'm not gonna stand up here and lie to you. I will tell you that following Jesus is more blessed than not in this life and in the next. Joshua followed God, but he still had to be faithfully obedient. Letter C, God's promises are not just personal, they're corporate. Look at verse 10. So Joshua ordered the officers of the people, so now this is Joshua executing the commands that God has given him. Verse 11, go through the camp, tell the people, get your provisions ready. Three days from now you will cross to Jordan here to go in and take possession of the land, but Lord, there's your God is giving you. Just because God promised the land didn't mean they didn't need a plan, didn't mean they didn't get ready, didn't mean they didn't need to steal themselves, prepare the wives and children, especially for the Reubenites and Gadis, everybody else, stayed behind. Didn't mean there wasn't work to do just because God had a plan. Don't get me wrong, I love my super great, and I'm gonna say this, Pentecostal friends, right? So for all my Pentecostal friends, I think it's great to just like let go and trust God, but sometimes I think that's cowardly because we don't make a plan. We don't say, God, how can I be the best servant in this moment? God, what can I do right now to be the best representative of your kingdom? What is the plan that you want me to execute? Yes, Sharita, sometimes you just got to walk in and go with God, but I don't also think that's the default all the time. I see God saying into his people in Israel, prepare. You have 3 days, get your stuff ready. Gents, go sharpen your sword. Make sure your shield is good. Check your laces. Why? Because we have to go to battle. Don't just walk out of the household humdrum, grab a Leatherman and think you're ready for a fight. That's not how life works. And I'm the one who walks out of house with a multi-tool every day. Why? Because I just need to be ready for whatever Jesus want. Jesus needs a Leatherman, I'm your boy. Jesus needs a sarcastic mouth. We'll call Jim. Just because God was with him doesn't mean they didn't need a plan. It also doesn't mean that God's still not the landowner giving it to his children. Verse 12, 13, and 14. I'm just going to abbreviate all of them. This is where God speaks to the Rubinites, the Gadites, the half-tribal Manasseh. Here's what I need you to understand. Israel is, I'm gonna try to do this backwards for you. So Israel is camped on this side of the Jordan River. My pulpit represents the Jordan. Israel is camped here. This is the promised land they're gonna receive. Not all 12 tribes, their land inheritance is over here. Some of them, their land inheritance is here. Meaning they are in the land promised to them. This are those tribes in verse 12. To the Rubinites, the descendants of Rubin, to the Gadites, the descendants of Gad, and the half-tribal Manasseh, that's one of Joseph's sons. To those groups of people, the Rubinites, the Gadites, the half-tribal Manasseh. Verse 13, remember the command the Moses servant Lord has given you. The Lord your God you give you rest by giving you this land. 14, your wives, your children, your livestock may stay in this land that Moses gave you east of the Jordan. So these families, they are already in their promised land. But that's only three tribes out of the whole nation. So these people, moms you get to stay put. Moms you get to keep your kids here. You get to keep your your livestock here. You get to start setting things up. Figuring out where you're gonna live. But dads, old young men of fighting age, guess what? Gear up. You don't get to stay home. You don't get to stay home with mama while she makes you fresh pita and hummus. You go with everybody else to help your brothers and sisters and your cousins and your aunties and your uncles and your abuelas help them inherit the land that they're supposed to inherit it. Verse 15, until the Lord gives them rest, who? This group over here that hasn't inherited their land yet. Until the Lord gives them rest as he has done for you. Until you have taken possession of that land that the Lord is giving to them. After that you may go back and occupy your own land that the servant of the Lord gave you east of the Jordan toward the Sunrise. These three tribes, Ruben, Gad, Manasseh. They had to give all of their fighting men over here to help the rest of the nation receive their inheritance. Let me just ask you a simple question. Number one, is there someone in your life whose inheritance you could be helping to secure? We always think about this group, right? The ones that had to move in and they had to fight for their land. No, this group over here I think had the greater test. Because the wives and the children all got to stay home in the land that was already theirs. But all of the fighting men had to leave, which means two things. Number one, you don't have all of the strength to build your infrastructure because you sent all your soldiers in. Number two, these people have no defense. You sent all your soldiers over the river. So moms, you're home with the kids. Hopefully nobody comes a-knocking. You can handle it the way Old Testament spiked to the head. Like, godly women can kill too. It's a weird story. I'm sorry, it's a weird Bible reference. If you don't know that story, it was during the judges period and the men were probably not doing what they're supposed to do. So God raised up a woman and God used this woman. She gave some warm milk to a soldier and then when he started to nap, she took a tent peg and just went straight through his skull. I'll find you the reference and put it in the app later. But it's a fantastic story. I don't know why. That's the ADHD. That's the story that came to my mind. All of these people got to keep their promised land and their inheritance but they didn't get to stay there. All the fighting men had to cross. Sometimes I think we can be so settled in our own blessing, we stop fighting for those around us. Sometimes I can be so enamored with what God has given me that I don't think about the fact that my brothers and sisters are still fighting for what's theirs. They're still in the thick of it but because I'm blessed and it doesn't bother me and it's not making me uncomfortable, I forget to give my effort to my brothers and sisters where they need it. Letter D. Covenant obedience is an all-in obedience. Verse 16 Then they answered Joshua, whatever you have commanded us to do we'll do. Wherever you send us we will go. 17, just as we fully obeyed Moses so we will fully obey you. Only may the Lord our God be with you as he was with Moses. I love this because if you've read the book of Joshua, they're going to screw this promise up in like two chapters. But what I love is in this moment they are, I don't believe they're lying. I think their emotions have gotten the better of them and they're speaking direct from the heart. They're, yeah, Josh, Josh, whatever you need man, I'm your boy. I'll be, I'll go where you go. I'll do what you need me to do. As long as it's not uncomfortable and I get my cut, which if you read the book of Joshua you know where we're going in chapter five. I think there are times where we verbally express the passion and the desire we have to just, I'll go where you go. I'll do what you do. God, I am totally yours. God, send me where you want to send me. But honestly, do they need missionaries in Bermuda? Because that would be great, right? Doesn't somebody need a Bible teacher in like Bora Bora? Can we do that? Is there a mission strip that involves white sandy beaches and umbrella drinks? Can we do that? I think they're genuine in their promise but they lack the character and depth to see it through. When temptation showed up, humanity fails. But the passion, the desire that we see in 17, 16 and 17, then they say only may the Lord your God be with you as he was. This is a restriction that they would follow Joshua as long as Joshua followed God. That's a smart restriction. And if you've, if you, this is one of your first times a catalyst, I will tell you, don't believe anything I say. Check everything. Always double check. Because I'm a human being and I'm and I can be a failure and get it wrong. I almost said I'm a failure. I had to stop down. You should never trust any pastor to teach the Bible correctly. Should always double check. Even as much as I try my best to study and prepare and be ready for your questions. I am a human being and I am fallible. Don't allow my passion for the word and my passion to be a teacher to overtake your responsibility. You can say, you know what, you know what Dr. Bill, I will follow you as long as you keep following Jesus. Never follow a pastor who's not following Jesus. Ever. That's that bad day. Bad things happen there. But again, I think the passion in 16, 17, look at 18. Whoever rebels against your word and does not obey it, whatever you may command them will be put to death. I love the passion. It is definitely an all-in style obedience that I wish more Christians had today. I wish there were more Christians who are like, Jesus, I will go wherever you go. I will do whatever you do. But don't let me talk to that one person at work because it's scary. I don't know about you but I feel that way. In fact, I was standing in the lobby right as church was starting and the worship team was singing and one of our hospitality members told me that we had several people who this is your first Sunday at catalyst. I'm like, don't tell me that right before church. That messes with my nerves, man. I'm a child of the 80s. I grew up as an only child and I need people to like me. So I get super nervous if I'm a little too ADHD, does that mean they're not going to come back? And then as a pastor, I end up tying the quality of my ministry to the number of people who come to church. And that's probably not really smart. Deb, we could just get more people to come to church if we gave out money. Justin, I don't know that that makes it a better church. I'm thinking to make it a fuller church for sure. Jim's just handing out $10 bills. Everybody who walks in the door. Jim, we should try that as an invitation strategy. Put that on the list. I think there are times where our passion can get away from us and our passion can lead us into a place that our character is not ready to keep us. Pastor Rick, my mentor who you will hear me reference all the time, he said, never let your gift take you where your character won't keep you. I think it's also true. Never let your passions lead you where your character can't protect you. Because then all of a sudden you're going to be deep into the middle of receiving the promised land. And as you'll see later in the series, it doesn't go well when disobedience creeps in. Their promise was from God. The will was written. The inheritance was ready, but their obedience was required. And it is an all in obedience to bring this forward into our new covenant today with our future inheritance. Where in your life are you offering God partial obedience, but calling it enough? Where in our lives do we give him some, but pretend it's all. Pretend it's full, but I really I'm holding back a piece for myself. What would all in obedience look like for you on Tuesday of this week? On Thursday of this week, Tuesday, Tuesday is your day off. What does all in obedience look like when you walk in it every single day? Let me give you the takeaway as I bring this one in for landing. And then Mel, I got probably like maybe eight or so minutes for question. Here's your takeaway. God's promises our hours to walk into not simply wait on receiving promises from God require active, faithful obedience, not just sitting and waiting. His faithfulness is not in question. He is faithful. He is loving. He is true all the time, all day, not just when we're good boys and good girl. His faithfulness is unyielding. That doesn't mean that ours is always on point.
